The Homer Horizon (formerly The Homerian) is a weekly hyper-local community newspaper based in the Village of Homer Glen, Illinois dedicated to the coverage of local news. The Homer Horizon is published by parent company, 22nd Century Media and is the sister paper of The Orland Park Prairie, The Mokena Messenger, The Frankfort Station, The New Lenox Patriot, and The Tinley Junction. The Horizon is delivered free every Thursday via the U.S. Mail to every home and business in Homer Glen, Illinois and parts of Lockport, Illinois in Homer Township. As of July 2009, circulation of The Homer Horizon is estimated at 13,400 homes and businesses1.
History
The first newspaper published by 22nd Century Media, The Homer Horizon was founded in 2005. The first issue was February 2, 2005. In 2005, the Village of Homer Glen was only recently incorporated and 22nd Century Media decided to launch its first new newspaper in this new town. The online edition of The Homer Horizon was launched mid-2007 and can be found at www.homerhorizon.com. The Homer Horizon relies one-hundred percent on advertising revenues. 89% of residents read the paper and 64% of readers read every single issue according to a recemt independent reader survey conducted in 2008 by Robert Olinto and Associates.2
Editorial Policy
The Homer Horizon is focused solely on the coverage of Homer Glen and Homer Township news. The Horizon is part of a new series of hyper-local newspapers that focus on micro-stories within a single community. The Homer Horizon is composed of four main sections: News, Sports, Local Living, and Life &amp; Arts. 22nd Century Media publications believe in maintaining strict objectivity and neutrality on political issues. The company's papers do not endorse candidates nor do they support ballot items. Instead, The Homer Horizon strives to give readers all information from both sides, in turn, allowing readers to make their own decisions. The goal of 22nd Century Media newspapers is to act as the voice, eyes and ears of its towns.
Exclusive Stories
On July 4, 2009, The Homer Horizon had exclusive coverage of the Homer-Lockport Tea Party protests held in Homer Glen, IL. The event was attended to by more than 500 in protest of government corruption and overtaxing at the local, state and federal levels of government.34 The Homer Horizon covers among other areas of interest the village government of Homer Glen, Homer Township, and Lockport Township High School District 205.
Online
In addition to the print content, The Horizon posts interactive videos, photo galleries, and a calendar online at http://www.homerhorizon.com. Users can create an account, build a personal profile, post comments, upload original content, and interact with other users all at the click of a mouse. 22nd Century Media sends out to e-mail subscribers weekly topical e-newsletters, breaking news alerts, and a weekend guide called Weekly Scoop. As of July 2009, more than 3,500 people subscribe to Weekly Scoop.
Staff
Editor: Ryan Terrell
Assistant Editor: Amanda Battaglia
Sales Director: Bridgette Bond
Web Editor: Lauren Franco
Ryan Terrell is the third editor of The Homer Horizon. He was preceded by Heather Warthen, first editor of The Homer Horizon, and Jennie Korb. Heather Warthen currently serves as the editor of sister publication The Orland Park Prairie. Current 22nd Century Media staffers Jamie Lynn Ferguson and Michael Gilbert have both served as assistant editors of the Homer Horizon.
Awards
The Homer Horizon is recipient of four awards in the past two years from the Illinois Press Association including: --1st Place, 2008 - Informational Graphic, Division C
--2nd Place, 2008 - Feature Writing, Division C
--3rd Place, 2008 - Feature Photo, Division C
--3rd Place, 2007 - Feature Writing, Division C
References
External links
The HomerHorizon
22nd Century Media
Category:Newspapers published in Illinois Category:Companies based in Will County, Illinois
http://www.homerhorizon.com/Articles-c-2009-07-16-197682.112113_A_Horizon_exclusive.html↩
http://www.homerhorizon.com/Articles-c-2009-07-09-197457.112113_Voice_of_the_people.html↩
