For the Minnesota politician, see Sandra Peterson (politician).
Sandra Marie Schmirler, SOM (June 11, 1963 &lt;U+2013&gt; March 3, 2000), was a Canadian curler, who captured three Canadian Curling Championships (Scott Tournament of Hearts) and three World Curling Championships. Schmirler skipped her Canadian team to a gold medal at the 1998 Winter Olympics, the first year curling was a medal sport. At tournaments where she was not competing, Schmirler sometimes worked as a commentator for CBC Sports, who popularized her nickname &quot;Schmirler the Curler&quot; and claimed she was the only person who had a name that rhymed with the sport she played. She died in 2000 at 36 of cancer.
Personal
Family and education
Schmirler was born June 11, 1963 to her parents Shirley and Art. She was born with a club foot which required her to wear a cast for two months. She had two older sisters, Carol and Beverley.1 She attended high school in Biggar, and moved to Saskatoon to attend university. She started out towards a degree in computer science, but transferred after her first year to work for a degree in physical education.2 She convocated with a Bachelor of Science in Physical Education in 1985.3 After moving to Regina, she met and married Del Peterson on August 1, 1987. They separated in 1992, and divorced a year later.4 She curled under her married name of Sandra Peterson from 1987 to 1996.5
In 1993, teammate Marcia Gudereit introduced Schmirler to Shannon England. On June 22, 1996, they were married.6 In 1997, Schmirler was pregnant with their first child. When this information was revealed to reporters at the Scott Tournament of Hearts, they jokingly dubbed her &quot;Schmirler the Hurler&quot;. On September 15, 1997, their daughter Sara Marion was born.7 In April 1999, Sandra's father Art Schmirler died from cancer. On June 30, 1999, the couple's second daughter, Jenna Shirley was born.8
Illness and death
After Jenna's birth, Sandra experienced many health problems. Testing discovered a cancerous node the size of a fist behind her heart.9 As her condition worsened, she underwent surgery on September 6, 1999. During surgery, a dead piece of the tumour broke off and released a blood clot into her lung. Her heart stopped beating, and only emergency heart massage kept her alive.10 Almost a month after being diagnosed with cancer, doctors finally provided a specific diagnosis – metastatic adenocarcinoma, with an unknown primary site. Because of the inability of anyone to pin down where the cancer came from, Sandra referred to it as &quot;the cancer from Mars.&quot;11 In addition to chemotherapy and radiation, Schmirler explored orthomolecular medicine, through the Canadian Cancer Research Group. This form of alternative medicine involves large doses of vitamins and nutrients.12
In 2000, Schmirler worked as colour commentator for CBC during Canada's national junior curling championships.13 During her illness, Schmirler had been largely removed from the public eye. While in Moncton for the tournament, Schmirler held a press conference to update her situation. In speaking publicly about her ordeal for the first time, Schmirler spared few details about what she had gone through, while also expressing her hope for the future: &quot;There were three goals I had coming out of this thing, and the first one was to look after my family. And the second one...because I curl so much, I've never taken a hot vacation, so I'm going to put my feet in the sand in a warm place. And the last one was to actually be here today, and I thank CBC, I thank Lawrence (Kimber), and Joan Mead.&quot;14
After returning from Moncton, Schmirler felt physically well, but suffered a setback when a CAT scan revealed spots around her lungs. The decision was made not to proceed with further chemotherapy, but she continued with the orthomolecular therapy.15 She had been scheduled to work the 2000 Scott Tournament of Hearts, but was unable to do so. She faxed a statement from the hospital, which was read by TSN's Vic Rauter. &quot;I'm still fighting hard and I still hope to make it to the Brier, not playing but talking. For Saskatchewan, I was hoping to be in your green shoes (at the Scott). But keep things in perspective. There are other things in life besides curling, which I have found. But I hope to be on the curling trail again next year. And I'll see you all in Sudbury (the next Scott site) in 2001. Your curling friend, Sandra.&quot;16 The optimism in her statement belied the seriousness of her condition. She had been moved to palliative care.17 She died on the morning of March 3, 2000 at age 36.18
Her death caused reactions not just within Saskatchewan and the curling community, but across the country. Canadian Prime Minister Jean Chr&lt;U+00E9&gt;tien said in a statement: &quot;All Canadians have been touched by the untimely death of Sandra Schmirler. Most of us came to know her through her exploits as a champion curler and as an exemplary sports ambassador for Canada. But what really set her apart was her bright, engaging personality and her incredible zest for life, qualities that were so clearly in evidence as she fought so valiantly against her illness. She will be sorely missed.&quot;19
TSN offered to broadcast her funeral live, and make the signal available to any other stations at no charge. Her husband, Shannon England, agreed to the broadcast on the condition that the family was not shown during the service. CBC also broadcast the service, marking the first time a Canadian athlete's funeral had been televised live on two networks.20 The Brier was just getting underway and games in the afternoon draw were delayed to allow curlers and fans to watch the funeral, which was broadcast on screens at the rink. Regina's Agridome and Schmirler's home Caledonian Curling Club also opened to show the funeral.21 Nine hundred people attended the service at the Regina Funeral Home, thousands watched at satellite locations around the province, and hundreds of thousands watched on television.22 The funeral was conducted by The Rev. Don Wells, and Sandra was eulogized by Brian McCusker, teammate Joan McCusker's husband.2324
Awards and honours
In addition to the titles captured by her team on the ice, Schmirler has been recognized in several different ways off the ice as well. In 2000, Schmirler was awarded the Saskatchewan Order of Merit, becoming the first posthumous recipient.25 Along with the other members of her rink, she had been previously awarded an honorary Doctor of Laws degree from the University of Regina.26 In the fall of 2000, Schmirler was inducted into the Canadian Sports Hall of Fame.2728
After her death, the city of Regina honoured Schmirler in several ways. The South East Leisure Centre where she used to work was renamed the &quot;Sandra Schmirler Leisure Centre,&quot; and the road leading up to the Callie Curling Club, where her team curled out of, was renamed &quot;Sandra Schmirler Way.&quot;2930 Schmirler's hometown of Biggar also honoured her memory with the construction of &quot;The Sandra Schmirler Olympic Gold Park.&quot;31
Scott Paper created the Sandra Schmirler Foundation in February 2001. The foundation raises funds to help care for babies in crisis through direct donations to benefit neonatal care across Canada. In the charity's first four years of existence donations were made to the Children's Miracle Network, Canadian Cystic Fybrosis Foundation and Canadian Ronald McDonald Houses. After altering the charity's mission to focus on neonatal care, donations have been made directly to hospitals in Halifax, Regina, London, Lethbridge, Hamilton and Victoria.32
On January 7, 2009, Sandra was named the winner of the 2009 World Curling Freytag Award. The award, named after American Elmer Freytag, who founded the World Curling Federation, honours curlers for championship play, sportsmanship, character and extraordinary achievement. Her husband and daughters accepted the award on her behalf at the 2009 Men's World Curling Championships.33
Notes
References
External links
The Sandra Schmirler Foundation
de:Sandra Schmirler pl:Sandra Schmirler fi:Sandra Schmirler
Category:1963 births Category:2000 deaths Category:Curlers from Saskatchewan Category:Members of the Saskatchewan Order of Merit Category:Olympic curlers of Canada Category:Olympic gold medalists for Canada Category:Winter Olympics medalists Category:Canadian Curling Hall of Fame inductees Category:Sportspeople from Saskatchewan Category:Canada's Sports Hall of Fame inductees Category:Canadian people of German descent Category:Curlers at the 1998 Winter Olympics Category:World curling champions Category:University of Saskatchewan alumni Category:Canadian women curlers Category:Curling broadcasters Category:Cancer deaths in Saskatchewan Category:People from Biggar, Saskatchewan Schmirler, Sandra
Lefko, p.8↩
Lefko, p.17↩
Lefko, p.21↩
Lefko, p.31↩
Lefko, p. 27, 53↩
Lefko, p.53↩
Lefko, p.57-58↩
Lefko, p.93↩
Lefko, p.97↩
Lefko, p.94-95↩
Lefko, p.101↩
Lefko, p.110↩
Lefko, p. 113-120↩
Lefko, p.128↩
Lefko, p.133↩
Lefko, p.133-134↩
↩
Lefko, p.141-142↩
Lefko, p. 143↩
Lefko, p. 145↩
Lefko, p. 153↩
Lefko, p.149↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
