Glen F. Barker (born May 10, 1971 in Albany, New York) is a former outfielder in Major League Baseball who played for the Houston Astros. He was a leadoff hitter with great defensive skills and was used mainly as a pinch runner. He has the rare distinction of having more major league career runs scored (53) than hits (38). Barker is also one of only seven players to have had more career games appearances than plate appearances.1 He currently serves as a scout for the Astros.
Barker attended Albany High School and the College of St. Rose, an NCAA Division II school in one of the only college conferences to use wood bats throughout the leagues' season.
Barker was selected by Detroit Tigers in 11th Round (305th overall) of 1993 amateur entry draft. Known for his speed on the basepaths (238 career minor league steals) and in center field, Barker advanced as far as Triple A with the Toledo Mudhens, but was selected by the Astros from Tigers in the 1998 MLB Rule 5 draft. Per Rule 5, he spent the 1999 season on the Astros' roster. He was successful in very limited playing time, used mostly as a pinch runner and sometimes as a pinch hitter Barker hit .288 stole 17 bases that season. Barker appeared in 2 games against Atlanta in the NLDS, stealing a base and scoring a run.
Barker spent the 2000 season between the major league club and AAA New Orleans. He struggled for the Astros, batting .224 in 67 at bats. 2001 was a similar year, as Barker struggled mightily at the plate (.083 batting average in just 24 at bats) and was again used primarily as a pinch runner. Although attracted to Barker's blazing speed, the Astros felt that his bat was not developing as they had hoped and they released him after the 2001 season.
Before the 2002 season, Barker was signed by the Montreal Expos but released after Spring Training. He was picked up by the Boston Red Sox and assigned to AAA Pawtucket. Again Barker struggled with the bat and was released by the Red Sox after appearing in only 14 games. He signed with Reynosa in the Mexican League and spent the remainder of the season there.
He signed with the Atlanta Braves before the 2003 season but was once again released after Spring Training. He played 3 games with the Somerset Patriots an independent team in the Atlantic League before being picked up by the Baltimore Orioles and assigned to the AA Bowie Baysox. After batting just .237 in a brief stint for the Baysox, Barker retired from baseball.
Barker is married and currently resides in Albany, New York. He is currently the outfield/baserunning coordinator for the San Diego Padres.
References
External links
Category:Major League Baseball outfielders Category:Houston Astros players Category:Houston Astros scouts Category:Saint Rose Golden Knights baseball players Category:Baseball players from New York Category:People from Albany, New York Category:Somerset Patriots players Category:1971 births Category:Living people
↩
