The Battle of Baykand was fought in 729 between the Turkic Turgesh khaganate and its Sogdian allies and the Arabs of the Umayyad Caliphate at Baykand, a town near Bukhara in Transoxiana. The Arab army, under the governor of Khurasan Ashras ibn Abdallah al-Sulami, campaigned across the Oxus River to suppress a large-scale rebellion of the subject Sogdian princes, that had broken out the previous year and received Turgesh support. As the Arab army advanced on Bukhara, it was encircled by the Turgesh and cut off from water. A series of engagements followed that almost ended in a disaster for the Arabs like the &quot;Day of Thirst&quot; five years earlier, but in the end, through the inspirational bravery of a few Arab leaders and the actions of the vanguard under Qatan ibn Qutayba, the Arabs broke through and reached Bukhara, which they laid siege to.
Background
The region of Transoxiana (Arabic: Ma wara' al-nahr) had been conquered by the Umayyad leader Qutayba ibn Muslim in the reign of al-Walid I (r. 705&lt;U+2013&gt;715), following the Muslim conquests of Persia and Khurasan in the mid-7th century. The loyalties of Transoxiana's native Iranian and Turkic populations and those of autonomous local rulers remained questionable, however, as demonstrated in 719, when the Transoxianian princes sent a petition to the Chinese and their Turgesh vassals for military aid against the Caliphate's governors. The Turgesh responded by launching a series of attacks against the Muslims in Transoxiana, beginning in 720, coupled with uprisings against the Caliphate among the local Sogdians. The Umayyad governor of Khurasan, Sa'id ibn Amr al-Harashi, harshly suppressed the unrest and restored the Muslim position almost to what it had been during the time of Qutayba, although Umayyad control over the Ferghana Valley was not restored. In 724, however, Al-Harashi's successor, Muslim ibn Sa'id al-Kilabi, and his army suffered a heavy defeat (the so-called &quot;Day of Thirst&quot;) at the hands of the Turgesh when he tried to subdue Ferghana. This defeat pushed the Arabs on the defensive, and even though no pitched battles took place, over the next few years the Arab position in Transoxiana collapsed swiftly.
Ashras al-Sulami's campaign
Faced with this crisis, the Caliph Hisham ibn Abd al-Malik (r. 724&lt;U+2013&gt;743) took drastic measures: Khurasan was separated from the purview of the governor of Iraq and raised to a separate province, under the Jaziran general Ashras ibn Abdallah al-Sulami. Ashras tried to win over the loyalties of the local population and the native converts (mawali) by addressing some of their grievances on taxation, but soon this policy was reversed&lt;U+2014&gt;possibly due to pressure from the Caliph himself&lt;U+2014&gt;and the often brutal measures the Arab tax-gatherers employed to gather the taxes from the mawali and the local landed aristocracy (dihqans) soon led to a general revolt in Transoxiana. This was made all the more dangerous to the Arabs due to the rebels' call for assistance to the Turgesh ruler, the khagan, who replied by leading his army in person against the Arabs. By the time the khagan entered the field in 728, only Samarkand and the two fortresses of Kamarja and Dabusiyya on the Zarafshan River remained in Arab hands in all of Transoxiana.
In order to confront the Turgesh, Ashras assembled the forces of Khurasan, and led them to Amul on the Oxus River. A vanguard under Qatan, son of Qutayba ibn Muslim, was sent over the river and established a fortified camp, but with the arrival of the combined native Soghdian and Turgesh armies, the bulk of the Arab force was unable to cross for three months. During this period Qatan's force was beleaguered by the Turgesh, who at the same time crossed the Oxus in small raiding parties. Ashras gave command of his cavalry to Thabit Qutnah, who managed to rout the raiders and drive them to Amul. There the Arabs defeated the Turgesh, although a decisive victory eluded them as Turgesh reinforcements crossed the river and allowed the raiders to escape to safety back over the Oxus. At length Ashras got his forces across, linked up with Qatan ibn Qutayba, and began to advance on Bukhara. The Arabs beat off attacks to reach the trading town of Baykand or Paykand, some five farsangs south of Bukhara itself and outside the oasis that surrounded the latter. After the Arab army encamped at Baykand, the Turgesh and Soghdians cut off the water supply from the oasis.
Threatened with thirst, the Arab army left Baykand and headed for Bukhara, with Qatan in the vanguard. When the Turgesh and Soghdian forces attacked, the vanguard, some 6,000 men, was cut off from the main body under Ashras, and Ashras and Qatan gave each other up for lost until they met again two days later. The king of Samarkand, Ghurak, who had unto this moment remained ostensibly loyal to the Arabs&lt;U+2014&gt;although, ever careful to hedge his bets, had sent his son Mukhtar to the khagan&lt;U+2014&gt;now switched sides. Exhausted by thirst, the vanguard was almost cut down by their enemies, losing 700 men. At this point, according to the account preserved by al-Tabari, the Tamimi warrior al-Harith ibn Surayj, who was later to lead a widespread revolt in Khurasan, urged the Arabs forward, crying that &quot;being killed by the sword is nobler in (this) world and greater in reward with God than death by thirst&quot;. Encouraged by his example, the Tamimi and Qaysi cavalry under al-Harith and Qatan broke through the Turgesh lines and reached the water sources, narrowly staving off a second &quot;Day of Thirst&quot; and allowing Ashras to continue his advance towards Bukhara.
Aftermath
Following the series of battles around Baykand, the Turgesh retired north to Samarkand, where he assaulted the fortress of Kamarja, while Ashras with his troops besieged Bukhara and wintered in its oasis. Warfare did not die down, however, and when Ashras' newly appointed successor, Junayd ibn Abd al-Rahman al-Murri, tried to reach the army, still encamped in Bukhara, in early 730, he had to be escorted from Amul by 7,000 cavalry, who were attacked on the way by the Turgesh and almost destroyed. Although Junayd was able to recover Bukhara soon thereafter, in the very next year he led the Khurasani army to a disastrous defeat in the Battle of the Defile, an event which shattered the tenuous Arab control over Transoxiana. The Arabs were not able to recover their position until the governorship of Nasr ibn Sayyar, who in 739&lt;U+2013&gt;741 managed to re-establish the Caliphate's authority up to Samarkand.
References
Sources
Category:729 Baykand Category:History of Central Asia Category:720s conflicts Baykand Category:720s in Asia
