Chiou I-jen (), born May 9, 1950, is the current Vice Premier of the Republic of China (Taiwan).
Early career
Chiou was born in 1950 in Pingtung County in southern Taiwan. He earned a BA in Philosophy from National Taiwan University in 1972, and subsequently attended the University of Chicago, where he earned an MA in Political Science.1 While attending the University of Chicago, Chiou was an influential member of the Taiwanese democratization movement, earning himself the nickname &quot;Loudspeaker.&quot;2
Foundation of the Democratic Progressive Party
Chiou returned to Taiwan, and in 1983, members of the &quot;New Tangwai Generation,&quot; including Chiou I-jen, formed the &quot;Association of Tangwai Editors and Writers.&quot;3 The group was focused on bringing democracy to Taiwan, enshrining that goal in their charter: &quot;...Taiwan's future should be decided by its 18 million inhabitants.&quot; The charter went on to say &quot;...the people of Taiwan have the right to choose independence.&quot; In 1986, Chiou, along with other members of the Tangwai movement, helped the movement coalesce into a coherent political party, thus forming the Democratic Progressive Party or DPP. Given that the KMT still ruled the island at the time and did not allow much at all in the way of political opposition, the DPP opted to take a low profile, yet continued to advocate its message of self-determination for Taiwan. Chiou's &quot;New Tangwai Generation&quot; group stuck together and formed the New Tide Faction within the DPP.
As the political climate in Taiwan grew less oppressive and more open, the DPP flourished and began competing with the KMT in elections. In the late 1990s, Chiou was appointed Secretary General of the DPP by party Chairman Hsu Hsin-liang, but resigned from the post in 1998 to take responsibility for the poor performance of the DPP in the three-in-one elections. The DPP had also begun sending its own representatives to the United States, so as to counterbalance the views of the official KMT-run Taipei Economic and Cultural Representative Office. Subsequent to his resignation as DPP Secretary General, Chiou was appointed DPP representative, and was sent to Washington, DC.
Election of Chen Shui-bian and government service
While serving as DPP representative to Washington, Chiou also served as the campaign manager for former Taipei Mayor Chen Shui-bian, who was running as the DPP candidate for Presdient. With Chen's election, Chiou was appointed Deputy Secretary General of the National Security Council. Shortly thereafter, Chiou was appointed Secretary General for the Executive Yuan, giving him a stronger hand in shaping government policy.
Chiou served in the EY until early 2002, when Yu Shyi-kun was appointed Premier. Premier Yu removed Chiou from his position as EY Secretary General and moved him to a position as minister without portfolio. In March 2002, Ting Yu-chou stepped down as Secretary General of the National Security Council, and President Chen selected Chiou to replaced him. Chiou served in this position from 2002-2003.
In January of 2003, in a reshuffle of personnel designed to better enable the DPP to wage its campaign for the 2004 Presidential election, President Chen moved Chiou from his position as NSC Secretary General to become the Secretary General of the Presidential Office, earning him the monniker &quot;The Permanent Secretary General.&quot;4 Regarded as the DPP's top elections strategist,5 Chiou once again successfully managed Chen's campaign, despite the apparent assassination attempt on President Chen and Vice President Annette Lu.
After the successful conclusion of the 2004 election, Chiou was moved back to the National Security Council as Secretary General, and remained there until early 2007, when he was moved back to the Presidential Office as Secretary General. On May 17, 2007, along with the rest of the Cabinet of out-going Premier Su Tseng-chang, Dr. Tsai Ing-wen resigned to make way for incoming Premier Chang Chun-hsiung and his Cabinet. Premier Chang named Chiou I-jen, to replace Dr. Tsai as Vice Premier.6
References
See Also
Government Information Office
ja:&lt;U+90B1&gt;&lt;U+7FA9&gt;&lt;U+4EC1&gt; zh:&lt;U+90B1&gt;&lt;U+7FA9&gt;&lt;U+4EC1&gt;
Category:Politicians of the Republic of China Category:Living people Category:1950 births
Vice Premier CHIOU I-jen The Government Information Office, Republic of China↩
President tells Chiou to be media's 'best friend' The China Post, Taiwan Page staff, February 8, 2007↩
Origin and Development of Adverse Current of 'Taiwan Independence' Jiefangjun Bao, Sun Shengliang, May 29, 2000↩
New lineup prepares for 2004 contest Taipei Times, Lin Chieh-Yu and Ko Shu-Ling, January 22, 2003↩
New lineup prepares for 2004 contest Taipei Times, Lin Chieh-Yu and Ko Shu-Ling, January 22, 2003↩
Taiwan's new premier picks tough strategist as deputy in limited Cabinet reshuffle The China Post, May 17, 2007↩
