The 1991 siege of Kijevo was one of the earliest conflicts in the Croatian War of Independence, where the Yugoslav People's Army (JNA) led by Ratko Mladi&lt;U+0107&gt; and the forces of SAO Krajina under Milan Marti&lt;U+0107&gt; besieged the Croat-inhabited village of Kijevo. The first part of the blockade took place in late April and early May 1991—lifted after negotiations in the aftermath of large protests against the JNA in Split.
The JNA renewed the blockade in mid-August. Kijevo was captured on August 26, and subsequently looted and torched. The fighting in Kijevo was significant as one of the first instances when the JNA openly sided with the SAO Krajina against Croatian authorities. The ethnic cleansing of Kijevo was later prosecuted by the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia and Croatian judiciary.
Background
In 1991, Kijevo was a village of 1,261 people, 99.6% Croats, but surrounded by ethnic Serbian villages of Pola&lt;U+010D&gt;a, Civljane and Cetina.
The ethnic Serbian villages had become part of the self-proclaimed SAO Krajina in 1990 through the so-called Log Revolution. Since August 17, 1990, Kijevo was surrounded by barricaded roads in Pola&lt;U+010D&gt;a and Civljane, and Kijevo's population started to organize an ad hoc militia in response to that; they smuggled weapons through mountain paths while keeping a distance from a nearby newly created outpost of the Yugoslav People's Army (JNA).
Following the Plitvice Lakes incident of April 1, 1991, the two militias each captured several prisoners in Civljane and Kijevo. On April 2, JNA intelligence officers reported on this, and warned how local militias in Kijevo and Civljane, otherwise separated by barricades, were engaged in armed skirmishes that threatened to escalate.
April&lt;U+2013&gt;May blockade
In the night of April 27-28, a group of Croatian Ministry of the Interior officers broke through the barricades and arrived in Kijevo. A Croatian police station was formally established in Kijevo on April 28. The JNA troops, commanded by the JNA 9th (Knin) Corps chief of staff Colonel Ratko Mladi&lt;U+0107&gt;, moved in to enforce a blockade, cutting all access and preventing delivery of supplies to Kijevo. The JNA subsequently entered the village in an effort to obstruct the newly created police station. In response to the arrival of JNA tanks and APCs, the civilians in Kijevo formed a human shield to protect the police station building, starting a standoff. On May 2, a Croatian police helicopter managed to land in Kijevo, and the blockade was strengthened in response so as to become impenetrable.
Croatian President Franjo Tu&lt;U+0111&gt;man called on the public to bring the siege to its end, and the plea resulted in a large-scale protest against the JNA in Split, organised by Croatian Trade Union Association in the Brodosplit Shipyard on 6 May 1991. The siege of Kijevo was lifted days after the protest through negotiations and two weeks after the JNA blockaded the village.
August blockade
The May arrangement proved short-lived, as the JNA units, again led by Mladi&lt;U+0107&gt;, put up barricades to prevent entry into the village on August 17, 1991. The next day, Croatian Serb leader Milan Marti&lt;U+0107&gt; laid down an ultimatum to the police and inhabitants of Kijevo, asking them to leave the village and its vicinity within two days or face an armed attack.
On August 23–25, Croatian forces evacuated nearly entire civilian population of the village. On August 25, Croatian forces launched a failed attack on JNA barracks in Sinj,  to the southeast of Kijevo. The objective of the attack was to obtain weapons needed as Croatian positions near Kijevo deteriorated.1
On August 26, the JNA attacked Kijevo, opposed by 58 policemen armed with small arms only and commanded by police station chief Martin &lt;U+010C&gt;i&lt;U+010D&gt;in &lt;U+0160&gt;ain. Between 05:18 and 13:00, the JNA fired 1,500 artillery shells against the village, and the Yugoslav Air Force supported the attack with 34 close air support sorties. The same afternoon, the JNA mounted a ground force assault on Kijevo. The attacking force consisted of approximately 30 tanks supported by JNA infantry and Croatian Serb militia.
The JNA entered the village by 16:30. Lieutenant Colonel Borislav &lt;U+0110&gt;uki&lt;U+0107&gt;, in command of the Tactical Group-1 tasked with capture of Kijevo and the commanding officer of the JNA 221st Motorised Infantry Brigade, reported that the village was secured by 22:30. The Croatian police fled Kijevo in three groups via Mount Kozjak towards Drni&lt;U+0161&gt;. The remaining Croatian population left after the artillery had destroyed much of their settlements. The reporter of Radio Television Belgrade Vesna Jugovi&lt;U+0107&gt; recorded these events. Krajina units commanded by Marti&lt;U+0107&gt; acted in concert with JNA to take command of the area.
Aftermath
The clash between the Croatian forces and the JNA in Kijevo was one of the first instances where the JNA openly sided with the insurgent Serbs in rapidly escalating Croatian War of Independence. The defending force suffered only two wounded, but one of the retreating groups was captured. The group, consisting of 20 men, were later released in a prisoner of war exchange. The JNA suffered no casualties. After the JNA secured Kijevo, the village was looted and torched. The destruction of Kijevo became one of the most notorious Serb crimes in the early stages of the war. The JNA units which took part in the fighting in and around Kijevo advanced towards Sinj in the following few days, capturing Vrlika before being redeployed to take part in the Battle of &lt;U+0160&gt;ibenik in mid-September.
At the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia, the trial of Milan Marti&lt;U+0107&gt; resulted in a guilty verdict with regard to Marti&lt;U+0107&gt;'s involvement on Kijevo, and the findings of the Trial Chamber in 2007 regarding Kijevo were confirmed by the Appeals Chamber in 2008, based on witness testimonies about it being ethnic cleansing. The events at Kijevo were not included in the indictment at the trial of Ratko Mladi&lt;U+0107&gt;, but the Croatian judiciary tried Mladi&lt;U+0107&gt; in absentia for war crimes committed in Kijevo. He was convicted and sentenced to 20 years in prison.
References
Sources
Books
News reports
Other sources
Category:1991 in Croatia Category:Conflicts in 1991 Category:Ethnic cleansing in Europe Category:Serbian war crimes in the Croatian War of Independence Category:Republic of Serbian Krajina Category:1991 in Yugoslavia Category:Sieges Category:Battles of the Croatian War of Independence
↩
