Edward Hitchcock Jr. (1828 &lt;U+2013&gt; February 15, 1911) was an American physical educator.
Biography
Born to Edward Hitchcock Sr., the renowned geologist and President of Amherst College and wife Orra White, Hitchcock attended Williston Seminary as a boy and continued his education while following in his father's footsteps by entering Amherst College in the fall of 1845. Hitchcock Jr. graduated from Amherst college in 1849, and later pursued a doctorate at Harvard Medical School. After receiving his doctorate, he married Mary Judson in 1853. They had ten children; three of whom died in infancy. Hitchcock Jr. returned to Amherst College in 1861 as professor of Hygiene and Physical Education. Hitchcock Jr. was the first ever physical educator.
History
Colleges had hired physical educators since the early 1820s, but Edward Hitchcock Jr. is generally credited with being the first formal physical educator at the collegiate level. He believed in the importance of sound physical health for college students, so that the mind could accomplish its best work and students could look forward to &quot;the promised labor of a long life.&quot; To achieve that goal, he developed systems of physical training intended to appeal to the students both mentally and physically. His program at Amherst became a model for college and secondary school programs nationally and internationally. The development of this first college program was Hitchcock's major contribution to the field of physical education.
Contributions
Edward Hitchcock Jr. contributed to Amherst College not only with his enlightened ideas concerning physical education, but also with his genuine personality. Hitchcock Jr. was noted as a kind, broad-minded, vigorous, optimistic, honest, faithfully religious man with shrewd common sense and an intense loyalty to the college. Students were known for being rather fond of Hitchcock Jr. as well, and he was often affectionately referred to as &quot;Old Doc&quot;.
Old Doc is a noted &quot;crusader for fitness&quot; he created schedules for physical exercises to be completed at the college. 1. While Edward Hitchcock Jr. actively practiced and taught physical education at Amherst, he also conducted research and intently studied the scientific functions that applied to his phys ed ideas. Hitchcock Jr. even worked with his aforementioned father Edward Hitchcock Sr to compile a textbook titled, 2 Elementary Anatomy and Physiology For Colleges, Academies and Other Schools. He named one of the earliest dinosaurs discovered in America, Megadactylus polyzelus. Later it was reclassified as the type specimen of Anchisaurus polyzelus (ACM 41109), a prosauropod. This botanist is denoted by the author abbreviation E.Hitchc. when citing a botanical name.3
References
Hitchcock, Edward. Elementary anatomy and physiology for colleges, academies and other schools. N.p.: Ivison, Phinney &amp;Co.,, 1860. 1-441. Web. 14 Mar. 2011. 1
McArdle, W. D. et al. Exercise Physiology. 4th edition. Williams &amp; Wilkins Publishers. Baltimore, 1996.
Edward and Mary Judson Hitchcock Family Papers, 1840-1962 (Bulk: 1850-1911)
Five Colleges
Category:1828 births Category:1911 deaths
An Annotated Catalogue of the Edward ... - Google Books↩
Elementary anatomy and physiology ... - Google Books↩
↩
