SummerSlam (2013) was a professional wrestling pay-per-view event produced by WWE that took place on August 18, 2013 at the Staples Center in Los Angeles, California.1 It was the twenty-sixth annual SummerSlam, and the fifth consecutive one held at the Staples Center.
Background
SummerSlam featured professional wrestling matches that involved different wrestlers from pre-existing feuds, plots, and storylines that played out on WWE's primary television programs. Wrestlers portrayed villains or heroes as they followed a series of events that buildt tension and culminated in a wrestling match or series of matches.
On the July 15 episode of Raw, new Raw General Manager Brad Maddox announced that WWE Champion John Cena could choose his own opponent for SummerSlam. Later in the night, after taking an informal poll of the live audience, he chose Daniel Bryan. On the August 12 Raw, Maddox served as special guest referee in a match with Bryan facing Wade Barrett. After making a quick count to allow Barrett to win the match, Maddox offered his services as the guest referee for the Cena-Bryan match at the PPV when Triple H interceded, and announced he would serve as referee instead (punctuated by a Pedigree to Maddox).
Also on the same episode, Brock Lesnar made his return when he attacked CM Punk. The following week on Raw, Paul Heyman accepted Punk's challenge for a match at SummerSlam on behalf of Lesnar.2
On the July 19 episode of SmackDown, Randy Orton defeated World Heavyweight Champion Alberto Del Rio in a non-title match. However, on the July 29 Raw, Christian also defeated Del Rio in a non-title match. To determine the next challenger for Del Rio's championship, new SmackDown General Manager Vickie Guerrero decided to make a triple threat match between Christian, Orton, and the returning Rob Van Dam. The match ended with Christian reversing Orton's attempt of an RKO into a backslide pin, winning the match and becoming the new #1 contender for the title before being attacked by Del Rio. On the August 9th edition of SmackDown, Christian defeated Del Rio in another non-title match.
At the Money in the Bank pay-per-view on July 14, Damien Sandow won the Money in the Bank briefcase for a future World Heavyweight Championship shot, betraying his former tag team partner Cody Rhodes in the process. Rhodes attacked Sandow after the latter's loss to Christian the following night on Raw. On the July 26 SmackDown, while Sandow was facing Randy Orton in a singles match, Rhodes took his briefcase, causing Sandow to lose the match and search for it. Rhodes threw it into the Gulf of Mexico, and Sandow was unable to retrieve it because he couldn't swim. It was announced on the August 5 Raw that Rhodes would face Sandow at SummerSlam. Four days later on SmackDown, Sandow debuted his new, brown Money in the Bank briefcase with a new World Heavyweight Championship contract. Later on, after Christian defeated Del Rio in a non-title match, Sandow attempted to cash in his contract, but his effort was thwarted by Rhodes.
On the July 8 Raw, after Kane defeated Christian in a singles match, The Wyatt Family attacked Kane, removing him from competing at the Money in the Bank match for the WWE Championship contract. The Wyatt Family attacked Kane again three weeks later on Raw, after Daniel Bryan defeated him in a singles match. A week later on Raw, after Erick Rowan and Luke Harper defeated Tons of Funk (Brodus Clay and Tensai) in a tag team match, Kane announced that he would face Bray Wyatt in a &quot;Ring of Fire&quot; match at SummerSlam.
After AJ Lee retained her Divas Championship against Kaitlyn at Money in the Bank and later on cost Dolph Ziggler at winning the World Heavyweight Championship, Ziggler broke up with Lee the next night on Raw, causing her to distract Ziggler in his non-title rematch against Del Rio and leaving Big E Langston to attack him. On the July 29 Raw, Kaitlyn defeated Lee in a non-title match to stay in contention for the Divas Championship, but four days later on SmackDown, Lee defeated Kaitlyn to retain the championship due to Layla interfering and protecting Lee. A week later on Smackdown, The Miz - the host of SummerSlam - announced that Kaitlyn and Ziggler would face Lee and Langston in a mix tag team match at the PPV.
On the August 12 Raw - as a result of their feud stemming from starring on Total Divas - Natalya challenged Brie Bella to a match at the PPV, which she accepted by slapping Natalya's face. Natalya also announced that The Funkadactyls (Cameron and Naomi) will be in her corner due the fact that Eva Marie has aligned herself with The Bella Twins. Later, on the same episode, Rob Van Dam won a 20 man battle royal (lastly eliminating Mark Henry) to win the right to challenge United States Champion Dean Ambrose for the title at the SummerSlam Kickoff Show, one hour prior to the PPV broadcast.
Matches
No.
Matches
Stipulations
Times
SummerSlam Kickoff
(Pre-show)
Rob Van Dam (with Mark Henry and Big Show) defeated Dean Ambrose (c) (with Seth Rollins and Roman Reigns) by disqualification
Singles match for the WWE United States Championship3
13:38
1
Bray Wyatt (with Luke Harper and Erick Rowan) defeated Kane
Ring of Fire match 4
07:49
2
Cody Rhodes defeated Damien Sandow
Singles match5
06:40
3
Alberto Del Rio (c) defeated Christian by submission
Singles match for the World Heavyweight Championship6
12:29
4
Natalya (with The Funkadactyls (Cameron and Naomi) defeated Brie Bella (with Eva Marie and Nikki Bella) by submission
Singles match7
04:19
5
Brock Lesnar (with Paul Heyman) defeated CM Punk
No Disqualification match8
25:17
6
Dolph Ziggler and Kaitlyn defeated Big E Langston and AJ Lee
Mixed tag team match9
05:46
7
Daniel Bryan defeated John Cena (c)
Singles match for the WWE Championship with Triple H as special guest referee10
26:54
8
Randy Orton defeated Daniel Bryan (c)
Singles match for the WWE Championship with Triple H as special guest referee
00:08
References
External links
Official website
Category:2013 in professional wrestling Category:SummerSlam Category:Wrestling in Los Angeles, California
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
