History
Sound Of Gospel Records was founded in Detroit, Michigan in 1969 by Armen Boladian. A few years later after it was established.
It is a gospel subsidiary record label of Westbound Records, where Boladian was also its former president.
His extended foray into gospel music is given a brief footnote in the story, and Sound of Gospel is not even mentioned by name, but it should have been. Many great artists, including the Clark Sisters, Mattie Moss Clark, Voices of Tabernacle, Jerry Q. Parries, Thomas Whitfield, the St. James Choir and others have had Sound of Gospel releases.
Sound Of Gospel had signed up well known gospel music acts like Mattie Moss Clark, The Clark Sisters, Yolanda Adams, the late Thomas Whitfield, and the Late Rev. James Moore.
Throughout its history, Sound Of Gospel had added a lot of other artists like Esther Smith, the Youth IV Christ Fellowship Mass Choir, etc.
Well known Pastor and Church Organist, the late Rev. Charles Nicks, Jr. along with the St. James Adult Choir also had signed up with the label, and had released a few albums like &quot;HOLD BACK THE NIGHT&quot;, and more.
From its humble beginnings up until now, it was and is still one of the major Gospel Record Labels which may continue to stand through the test of time through their continuous goal of releasing Gospel Music for all the world to hear.
Artist Roster (Past &amp; Present)
This is a list of artists, past and present, who have recorded albums for Sound Of Gospel Records over the past few decades
The Clark Sisters 1976-1982
The New Jerusalem Baptist Church Mass Choir
Esther Smith
Rev. Charles Nicks, Jr. &amp; The St. James Adult Choir
Kenneth Ward &amp; The Southwest Mass Choir
Galilee Mass Choir
Ruth Busbee
Thomas Whitfield
Rev. Charles O. Miles
The B.L.&amp; S. Singers
Andre Woods &amp; Chosen
Michael Johnson
Rev. Donald Vails &amp; the Choraleers
The Bright Star Male Chorus
Yolanda Adams
Jerome L Ferrell
Greater Cleveland Choral Chapter
Rev.,Dr. George A. Copeland &amp; The United Faith Church of Deliverance Mass Choir
Mattie Moss Clark
International Gospel Center's Voices Of Deliverance
Joy
Wolverine State Baptist Mass Choir
Rev. James Moore
Wanda Nero Butler
Thomas Butler
Youth IV Christ Fellowship Mass Choir
Jerry Q. Parries &amp; The Christian Family Choir
Herman Harris &amp; Voices of Faith, Hope &amp; Love
Texas Mass Choir of the GMWA
Voices of Heaven
D.K. Craig &amp; Voices of Tabernacle
Harold Sutton
B. J. Fears &amp; the L.I.F.E. Choir
Anthony Whigham
John W. Griggs
Atlanta Philharmonic Chorale
Timothy Wright
Lighthouse Inter-Denominational Choir
F.A.M.E. Freedom Choir
Charles G. Hayes
Cosmopolitan Church of Prayer Choir
James Cleveland
Arvis Strickling-Jones
Michigan State Community Choir
Anthony Whigham
Rev. Walter Richardson
Vincent Manyweather
Helen Stephens
The Northern California Chapter of GMWA
Salvation Corporation
Hit Songs
This is a list of one of the songs that was made into a national hit on Sound Of Gospel Records.
You Brought The Sunshine Into My Life - The Clark Sisters
External links
Detroit Gospel website
Category:American record labels Category:Christian record labels Category:Record labels established in 1969 Category:Companies based in Detroit, Michigan
