Burton Road Metrolink Station is a future station which is to be constructed on one of the new lines on the Manchester Metrolink light rail public transport system in Manchester, England,UK.
The station is part of Phase 3B of the &quot;Big Bang&quot; extension project which will increase the Metrolink network size by . Among other proposals, this project plans to re-open a disused railway through the suburbs of south Manchester to operate a light rail service into Manchester City Centre.1
Located on the west side of Burton Road in Withington, the new stop on this stretch of line will be in a cutting.
History
 In 1880 the Midland Railway opened the new Manchester South District line which ran from Manchester Central Station.2 The line was later operated by the Cheshire Lines Committee. Under British Rail operation, the line closed in 1967 as part of the Beeching Axe.
Plans to re-open the line for light rail use have been proposed since the early 1980s,3 but these proposals failed several times due to problems securing funding.4 Revised plans put forward in 2006 only allowed for the line to be opened as far as St. Werburgh's Road in Chorlton.5
In 2009, following the failure of the Greater Manchester Transport Innovation Fund, revised transport funding was announced by the Govenment which would facilitate a major expansion of the Metrolink network, including the re-opening of the former Midland line and stations as far as East Didsbury.67 
Metrolink extension
It is now planned to re-open the former CLC line after the junction with the Altrincham line at Trafford Bar, and to run a light rail service from East Didsbury, through Burton Road, into Manchester.
Burton Road station will be a newly-constructed stop on the South Manchester line, rather than a re-opened station. Passengers will be able to travel by rail bewteen Manchester and East Didsbury for the first time since the line was closed in 1967.
The date for the station's opening has not been confirmed as yet, but it will be post 2011.
References
External links
http://www.lrta.org/Manchester/City_South.html
Metrolink Future Network - map of the planned extensions (GMPTE, 2009)
Category:Future Manchester Metrolink stations
↩
↩
 - publicity brochure↩
↩
↩
↩
