Zon was a progressive rock band from Toronto, Canada formed in the mid-70's
History
Formed in Toronto in 1977 the Rock band consisted of vocalist Denton Young, guitarist Brian Miller, bassist Jim Sampson, drummer Kim Hunt and keyboard player Howard Helm. They released just 3 albums over 5 years. Don V. Lorusso produced the bands first album called 'Astral Projector', released on blue vinyl. The album became an FM radio staple in the late '70's. The album garnered the band a 'Best New Group' Juno Awards1 nomination. The band would find themselves opening up gigs for the likes of The Tubes at Toronto's Maple Leaf Gardens, and with Styx and Moxy at CNE Stadium getting opening slot encores on both occasions!
1979's 'Back Down To Earth' was produced by Don V. Lorusso and the late Vancouver keyboard whiz Dale Jacobs. The band played Toronto as headliners where a hometown crowd swelled to 17,800 people. A reporter for the Globe &amp; Mail, who had only stayed to see the opening act, wrote a scathing review thinking he had seen Zon. The negative review was the headline of the entertainment page, nationally in Canada. CBS demanded compensation for the impact on Zon's popularity but neither the band, nor the label, ever recovered.
Zon was dropped from CBS after a thorough corporate housecleaning of the A &amp; R Department despite Zon already having their contract picked up for a third album.
The ensuing legal battle took much of the heart out of the band, but they did manage one more album for Falcon Records called 'I'm Worried About The Boys' produced by then former CBS A &amp; R man Bob Gallo. The record featured a cover version of the Velvet Underground's &quot;Sweet Jane&quot;.
As part of the 1980 tour to support the album, Zon did an opening slot for Alice Cooper at Toronto's CNE Stadium. When Cooper failed to appear minutes before showtime, Denton Young was given the onerous task of telling the audience. A riot ensued and police had to be called out. The band broke-up shortly after despite the 1981 single &quot;For You&quot; reaching #2 on CKOC in Hamilton (higher than any of the previous singles on CBS Records).
After Zon
Singer Denton Young most recently popped up on Rik Emmett's solo work; Kim Hunt would go on to join Hanover, Urgent and is currently in Moxy; Jim Samson is now with Moxy; Roddi Chappell is in long running AOR band Lightspeed who released two CDs on Pacemaker in the '90s; Brian Miller works at Toronto's famed 12th Fret guitar store; Howard Helm joined Michael Fury which mutated into Refugee. In 1988 Helm was offered a job as touring keyboardist for Mick Ronson and Ian Hunter. He took the job and spent 4 years on the road touring the world. He is currently writing for TBS television in Atlanta and Universal Studios in Orlando. He continues to play keyboards in-studio for the likes of bands like Seven Mary Three and others.
At the moment Helm and his former Zon bandmates are contemplating a new studio album to coincide with the re-issues of that band's back catalogue on CD?
Members
Denton Young (vocals, percussion)
Howard Helm (keyboards, vocals)
Brian Miller (guitar, vocals)
Kim Hunt (drums)
Jim Sampson (bass)
Singles
1978 Melody
1978 Melody/On The Road
1980 Sweet Jane / Takin' The Easy Way Out
1980 For You/Just The Other Side
1981 Better Get Up
Albums
1978 Astral Projector
1979 Back Down To Earth
1979 Back Down To Earth - Special Edition
1980 I'm Worried About The Boys
References
rockreport
progarchives.com
nehrecords.com
Category:1970s music groups Category:1980s music groups Category:Canadian rock music groups Category:Ontario musicians
↩
