 The manga and anime series Highschool of the Dead features a diverse range of characters created by Shoji Sato. The series revolves around a pandemic that turns humans into zombies, euphemistically referred to by the main characters as &quot;Them&quot;, and the story follows a group of students at Fujimi High School: Takashi Komuro, Rei Miyamoto, Saeko Busujima, Saya Takagi, and Kohta Hirano; Shizuka Marikawa, the high school's nurse, and Alice Maresato, a young girl, as they fight their way to safety through the deadly streets of Japan during a worldwide catastrophic event known as the &quot;Outbreak&quot;.
Main characters
Takashi Komuro
1
is a 17 year-old second-year student of Fujimi High School and the male protagonist of the series. He and Rei are childhood friends who are in the same class. He has loved her ever since she made a childhood promise to marry him when they were older, but because of Takashi's indecisiveness, Rei ended up dating their friend Hisashi. He was one of the first people to notice that something was wrong in the school, when the teachers were attacked at the front gate. When Hisashi was bitten, Takashi was asked to throw Hisashi off the roof, but Rei refused, and when Hisashi turned into a zombie, Takashi killed him with a blow to the head. After being accused by Rei that he did that out of jealousy, Takashi proceeds to leave, but Rei holds him back, apologizing, and Takashi responds with a hug.
Though initially depicted as a poor student who often skips class and was held back a year, he is proven to be a very reliable and capable person with a resolve to protect his friends. He is given the role of leader of the group by his peers.
Takashi initially uses a baseball bat to fight, but recovers a Smith &amp; Wesson Model 37 pistol from a dead cop, and, in chapter 9, he tries out the Ithaca M37 riot shotgun that he and Kohta acquired when they stayed at Rika's apartment when they fight at the Humvee. When they raid the police station, he finds a Benelli M4 Super 90 combat shotgun.
Although he doesn't officially have a license, Takashi can ride a motorcycle and he also drove an Argo ATV.2
Rei Miyamoto
3
is Takashi Komuro's classmate and the female protagonist of the series. Before high school, she made a pinky promise to marry Takashi in the future, but because of Takashi's indecisiveness, Rei ended up dating Hisashi. Rei was furious when Takashi killed Hisashi even though he turned into a zombie. However, when Takashi was going to leave, Rei quickly rescinded her words and apologized, pulling him back, and then received a hug from Takashi.
Rei dated Hisashi, but her feelings for Takashi never disappeared. In chapter 12, Rei tells Takashi that girls like guys that are cute and caring, even though Takashi replied that he wasn't either of those. Rei responds that she used to be like that, but because Takashi is selfless, that's why she likes him, and she doesn't want him to be with any other girls.
Rei dislikes Mr. Shido. In chapter 14, Rei reveals that Shido held Rei back a year in school because Rei's father was a police detective who was investigating some funding corruption by Shido's father.
Rei is a member of the s&lt;U+014D&gt;jutsu club, so for weapons, Rei started fighting the zombies using the sharp end of a disassembled broomstick. After visiting Rika's apartment, she uses a Springfield M1A1 Super Match rifle with a bayonet attached.
Saya Takagi
4
is a second-year student at Fujimi High School. She is a self-proclaimed genius; her knowledge and deductive capabilities have allowed the group to escape from harm many times. Her hair style is pink twin tails, and in chapter 2, she wears glasses after stating that her contacts have been in too long. She was among the first to conclude that &quot;they&quot; were attracted to only sound. She and Takashi have also been childhood friends since kindergarten, although this is not mentioned until the gang reaches the Takagi estate.
Slightly self-conscious, she detests the fact that people, due to her status, only call her by her last name and never look her in the eyes when speaking to her. Thus, she insists that Kohta and Takashi call her by her first name throughout the series, even stating that they would lose their privilege to do so if they don't listen to her. She also insists that Alice call her by the -onee-sama(big sister) honorific instead of the -chan honorific.
Saya is the daughter of an influential Uyoku dantai politician, and her family is fairly wealthy, that they are able to use their mansion estate as a base. Her relationship with her parents is mixed; on one hand, she admires all their capabilities in saving their staff, but on the other hand, she believes they neglected finding her when the outbreak happened.
Saya is hinted to have romantic feelings for Takashi but denies it when confronted. Saya might also have some feelings for Kohta, as his image haunts her in a dream, and she tried to bury her feelings when she sees Kohta and Asami happily conversing, sadly telling Alice that she can't be the best in everything.
Saya initially used an electric drill on a zombie in the school, and later she borrows a rifle to fight off the zombies when they are stuck at the Humvee When the zombies invade the Takagi estate, Saya's mother gives her a Luger P08 pistol. After the gang raids the police station, she expresses her desire to fight more, and exchanges her mom's Luger for Kohta's Suppressed MP5 SFK.
Kohta Hirano
is a 16-year old second-year student at Fujimi High School. Although he appears to be just another wimpy overweight guy with glasses, Kohta is a gun otaku; his knowledge of firearms and skills as a basic marksman have proven to be an invaluable asset to keeping everyone alive. He credits this to a visit to America, where he spent a month doing Army training with a guy who worked for the US military contractor, Blackwater. In the beginning of the story, Saya rescues Kohta who was cringing in the hallway after the students were running out in panic. They hide out in a classroom where Hirano is able to craft a nail gun rifle that fires using gas cartridges. Kohta has a crush on Saya and has wanted to ask her out on various occasions, only to either be rejected or not taken seriously. Kohta was also the first guy who wanted to rescue Alice, after seeing her father get killed by neighbors, and her being left for &quot;them&quot;.
At Saya's mansion, Kohta is confronted by some of Takagi's followers who demand that he surrender his weapons, but Kohta refuses, saying this was the one thing he was good at, and that he wanted to protect Saya. The rest of the group, including Saya, came out to defend him.
Kohta develops feelings for the police officer trainee, Asami Nakaoka, after helping her by subduing an angry mall survivor. He spends some quality time with her, and after she briefly escaped to the rooftop from seeing her supervisor turned zombie, Kohta manages to convince her to join the group. Unfortunately, the friendship is short-lived as Asami attempts to save a boy in the parking lot, and gets trapped. She shouts for Kohta to make it so that she won't become a zombie and cause pain to others around her. Kohta later finds himself in shock over what he did, but he is set straight by Shizuka, who uses a psychology trick of ordering him around like a sergeant.
Since crafting a nail gun rifle, Kohta has used a variety different firearms, preferring the AR-10 (illegally modified to resemble an SR-25), since it has a scope to take out targets from a distance. During the raid on the police station, Kohta finds a Suppressed MP5 SFK, but soon afterwards, gives it to Saya while holding onto her mom's Luger P08 pistol.
His character seems to be based on Hirano K&lt;U+014D&gt;ta, the author of the Hellsing manga, as they both wear glasses, are overweight, and have detailed knowledge of different firearms.5
Saeko Busujima
6
is a third-year student at Fujimi High School and president of the school's kendo club, extremely skilled at close combat with a bokken (wooden sword). She initially wears a long skirt at school. Saeko has a calm and collected personality, with a sense of pride in her skills. Early on in the series, Saeko does a mercy killing on a student who was bitten. Not much is known about her family except that she mentioned her father had traveled abroad for a martial arts tournament.
Saeko shares with Takashi about how four years prior, an assailant attacked her, but she easily fought back with her bokken, breaking several of his bones before the police came. Although it was claimed to be self-defense, Saeko says this is her &quot;raw nature&quot; of taking pleasure in inflicting pain, and in that way she is no different from one of &quot;them&quot;. She struggles with this part of her character, and even considers giving up to &quot;them&quot;. When she fights her way out of the grounds, Saeko is so excited that she even says , a double entendre, considering she was doused by the river water earlier.78
Saeko uses a bokken for a weapon, but when they are at the Takagi estate, Saya's father tells Saeko that her father once gave him guidance so to repay the favor, and he gives her a katana, crafted in the Tokyo armory by General Murata during the Meiji Era. After the gang visit the police station, Saeko begins to carry a M92 Vertec handgun on her thigh.
Shizuka Marikawa
9
is a single 26-year old woman and the school nurse at Fujimi High School. At the beginning of the story, Shizuka was saved by Saeko. She has a rather ditsy personality, and her large bust size is often used as a comical element in the story. She is close friends with Rika Minami, who works as a sniper on the prefectural police Special Assault Team, and she even house-sits for Rika; the gang uses Rika's apartment to rest after they escaped the high school. Despite being the only adult in the group, she is emotionally fragile and doesn't know what will become of her life, revealing to Takashi that she is just the temporary school nurse, and is still taking classes and training. Despite that, Shizuka has put her knowledge to good use, and was also able to bring Kohta to his senses after an incident where Asami Nakaoka was killed.
As the eldest and only one with a license, she is the group's designated driver, initially driving the bus out of the school, and then Rika's military-grade Humvee.
Alice Maresato
10
is a 7 year-old second-grade girl whom Kohta and Takashi rescued from the zombie horde after her father was killed by members of a household who wouldn't allow them shelter. She seems to have a cheery attitude, as Takashi and Saeko comment how she has &quot;done well&quot; in coping with the loss.
In the English dub of the anime, she goes by the name Arisu.11 According to a bonus chapter, she was the next door neighbor to Takashi's friend, Imamuru.
Zeke
, known in the English anime as Zero, is a dog that joins the group when Takashi rescues Alice. He is named after the Mitsubishi A6M Zero fighter plane, which was also nicknamed Zeke by the Allied forces during World War II.
Recurring characters
Koichi Shido
12
is the main antagonist of the series and the teacher of Class 3A. Rei Miyamoto is afraid and is disgusted by him and Saeko Busujima says his name with a scowl, hinting that he apparently is a sadistic and villainous character. This is affirmed when he leaves behind a student who sprained his ankle and even kicks him back towards a group of pursuing zombies, saying there is no point in keeping weaklings alive.
After Rei and Takashi leave, Shido appoints himself leader of the group on the bus, winning the approval of the other students. Saya and Saeko comment that Shido's actions are like that of a recruiter for a religious cult. Shido permits the main cast to leave the bus except for Shizuka, but Kohta expresses his disapproval of Shido's actions and grazes Shido's face with a nail gun shot, stating that Shido used to allow bullies to beat Kohta up as he watched with glee.
Shido reappears when he is talking with a spy at the Takagi estate. He then watches over an orgy among his followers. He finds this behavior acceptable during the group's &quot;free time&quot;. Shido declares his followers angels that will help usher in a new age, but when one of the boys disagrees and shows concern for his own family, Shido convinces his followers to eject the &quot;weak link&quot; for the sake of the New World, and they callously throw the teen off the bus and leave him to be eaten by &quot;them&quot;.
Shido was the son of Ichiro Shido, a politician that was admired by Saya&lt;U+2019&gt;s father. His mother died, but he went into the teaching profession at Tokonosu where his father was a director. But his father had an illegitimate son, and he was ordered to work in the family business with his half-brother; one of the shady dealings involved stopping Rei&lt;U+2019&gt;s father from investigating the Shido family&lt;U+2019&gt;s funding, and so he arranged that Rei was to be held back a year. When Rei threatens to kill Shido with her rifle-mounted bayonet, Shido dares her to do it, but she cannot, saying he is not worth the trouble. Saya's dad orders him and his student followers to leave, and he complies, but a high-altitude nuclear explosion causes both the bus and nearby forklift with a concrete barrier to stall and they collide. He recovers consciousness in time to see the undead horde advancing through the gap in the barrier.
Shido's back is seen as he prepares to enter Shintoko Third Elementary School.
Rika Minami
13
is the chief of first squadron in the prefecture police and an expert sniper (5th in the country) in the Special Assault Team, who, along with the Special Security Team, were sent to clear the nearby airport of any zombie stragglers and to rescue any survivors. She is friends with Shizuka, and let her house-sit while she is on assignment. On one of her missions, she helped her partner sacrifice himself by using jet fuel in a tanker to immolate the zombies. She manages to get in contact with Shizuka, who informs her that they &quot;stayed over and borrowed her weapons and things,&quot; before the communication is cut by an EMP surge. She was last seen leaving to go to the city, presumably for her friend Shizuka.
Other characters
Hisashi Igo
14
is a second year student at Fujimi High; he is Rei's classmate and boyfriend. He, Takashi, and Rei were among the first to try and escape the rampage at the school. Hisashi decided that the zombies should not be named as such like in the movies, but that they should be called &quot;them&quot;. On the way out of class, he was bitten by an infected teacher. Aware of his fate, he requested that Takashi throw him off the rooftop, but before Takashi could do that, he died, leaving Rei crying in pain, but then he rose back up as one of &quot;them&quot;, so Takashi consequently finished him off with a blow to the head.
Soichiro Takagi
is the leader of a right-wing nationalist group in the Tokonosu district; he managed to keep his staff and a group of survivors holed up at his estate, and mobilized some of them to defend against the zombies when they do their runs to check the power and water stations. He added a rather pointed illustration by killing his zombified subordinate. He also ordered that Kohta give up his weapons; however, Kohta insisted on keeping them to protect Saya, and Kohta's friends rallied in support.
Soichiro seems to be a sword expert, as he preferred using that over his wife's Luger P08 pistol. He trained with Saeko's dad, and entrusts Saeko with a katana. When the zombies breach the estate, he and his troops fight them off. He tells Takashi to get on his way to save Rei's parents, and entrusts Hirano with protecting Saya. Soichiro and his wife were last seen fighting against the horde with rest of the estate survivors while saying that they were proud of their daughter and the friends she made.
Yuriko Takagi
is Soichiro's wife and Saya's mother. Yuriko was once a Wall Street stock broker who later married her future husband after she was impressed with his charisma and political skills. Thanks to her business connections, the Takagi family fortune rose significantly. When the zombies breached the estate, she gave Saya her Luger P08 pistol. She was last seen with her husband and other survivors fighting against the horde.
Miku Yuuki
is a student at Fujimi High. According to Morita, she is considered one of the sexist girls in school, and has &quot;a lot of weird talk&quot; surrounding her. She escaped with Fujimi High School's other survivors but sided with Shido's group, participating in their debauchery, and even suggesting they kick a discontent student off the bus. She helped Shido enter Saya's family compound by using her sex appeal, but was forced to leave like everyone else that came with Shido. She apparently survived the zombie breach at Saya's mansion, appearing alongside Shido at the entrance to Shintoko Third Elementary School.
Asami Nakaoka
is a young traffic enforcer for Tokonosu Higashi Police Station; she ended up guarding a group of survivors at the mall. She refers to herself in the third-person. Asami's authority quickly waned amongst the survivors until Kohta and Takashi intervened by handing her their Smith &amp; Wesson Model 37 pistol (the standard-issue firearm for Japanese police officers) and building up her confidence. She develops a liking for Kohta after he subdued a guy named Shimada who wanted to sexually assault Shizuka. Asami later accompanies Takashi to help obtain blood plasma for a sick survivor, and is forced to mercy kill one of the mall survivors, Tamaru, when he is bitten by &quot;them&quot;.
Asami's superior officer is Matsushima, who had left for the police station when Takashi and the gang arrived., but she is shocked when Matsushima returns as a zombie. She dejectedly runs to the mall's rooftop, but is encouraged by Kohta to go with him and his friends.
When the zombies invade the mall, Asami manages to use some firecrackers to divert their attention. Shortly after breaking out of the mall with the group, she attempts to save a frightened student trapped on top of a truck in the parking lot. She and Shimada distract the zombies long enough for the student to escape, however, Asami herself becomes trapped without any more bullets. Asami shouts that she hates Kohta, although Takashi immediately recognizes and tells Kohta she is just yelling to attract the zombies so they can escape. She shouts out one final request for Kohta to not let her get turned into a zombie, and Kohta sadly aims his rifle at her head as she salutes goodbye.
Tadashi Miyamoto
is Rei's father. He has yet to make an appearance in the series, as only his voice is heard on the phone, During the call, for reasons unknown, Tadashi cannot recognize Rei's voice and tries to tell Takashi something before the signal is lost.
In a confrontation with Shido, Rei reveals that she was held back in school because Tadashi was investigating Shido's father for some shady funding sources. In tears, Tadashi apologized to Rei and told her what had happened, but hoped to continue the investigation so he could arrest Shido and his father. Tadashi left a message on a whiteboard at the police station for all surviving police to head towards Shintoko Third Elementary School for a scheduled evacuation by the SDF.
Kiriko Miyamoto
is Rei's mother, Kiriko, was one of the survivors in Rei's neighborhood who went out for supplies, but since her return her neighbors have refused to let her back through. Rei and the gang find her outside a barricade, and they head to Shintoko Third Elementary School to meet with the other survivors. Kiriko was a fierce police officer before she was married, that she was given the nickname Precinct Kiriko. She also seems to be skilled in s&lt;U+014D&gt;jutsu, as she carries Tadashi's spear.
References
Highschool of the Dead manga volumes by Daisuke Sato. Original Japanese version published by Kadokawa Shoten. English translation published by Yen Press.
See also
Highschool of the Dead
Highschool of the Dead
↩
↩
↩
 - on his listing of Best Female Character &quot;I regret not having Ayuzawa Misaki up here, since she's actually a pretty refreshing female character in Maid-Sama (as explained a more professional way in this blog), and even more so not having Saeko Busujima from High School of the Dead, simply because of that pitch-perfect delivery of &quot;I'm Wet!&quot;&quot;↩
↩
