The Flat Hat Club (as it was known outside its membership) or F.H.C. Society was the first of the collegiate secret societies or fraternities founded in the present United States, at the College of William and Mary in Williamsburg, Virginia, on November 11, 1750.
History
The initials of the F.H.C. Society stand for a Latin phrase, likely &quot;Fraternitas, Humanitas, et Cognitio&quot; or &quot;Fraternitas Humanitas Cognitioque&quot; (two renderings of &quot;brotherhood, humaneness, and knowledge&quot;). As members of the first American collegiate fraternity in the modern sense, the &quot;brothers&quot; of the F.H.C. devised and employed a secret handshake, wore a silver membership medal, issued certificates of membership, and met regularly for discussion and fellowship. The Society became publicly known as the &quot;Flat Hat Club&quot; in probable allusion to the mortarboard caps then commonly worn by all students at the College (now worn at graduation by students at most American universities).
William &amp; Mary alumnus and third U.S. President, Thomas Jefferson, is perhaps the most famous member of the Flat Hat Club.1 Other notable members of the original Society included Col. James Innes, St. George Tucker, and George Wythe.2 Jefferson noted that &quot;When I was a student of Wm. &amp; Mary college of this state, there existed a society called the F.H.C. society, confined to the number of six students only, of which I was a member, but it had no useful object, nor do I know whether it now exists.&quot;3
A second Latin-letter fraternity, the P.D.A. Society (publicly known as &quot;Please Don't Ask&quot;), was founded at William and Mary in March, 1773, in imitation of the F.H.C. Society. John Heath, a student at William and Mary who in 1776 sought but was refused admission to the P.D.A., later established the first Greek-letter fraternity, the Phi Beta Kappa Society.4
The student members of the F.H.C. suspended the activities of the Society in 1781, probably as a result of the suspension of academic exercises at the university (which the College of William and Mary had become in 1779) as the contending armies of the American Revolution approached Williamsburg during the Yorktown campaign. The name of the Society was revived in the twentieth century by application to a select group of twelve undergraduate men and several professors which had been founded in 1916 as the Spotswood Club (it thus differed markedly from the original Society, a fraternity of six undergraduate men with alumnus members &quot;in urbe&quot;). The Society again suspended its activities in 1943 as the number of men enrolled at the College steeply declined because of American involvement in World War II.
The modern F.H.C. Society was revived in May, 1972.5 It remains an all-male fraternity, with most of its activities comparatively secret within the university.
The Flat Hat, the twice-weekly student newspaper of The College of William and Mary, took its name from the public nickname of the Society.
References
Bibliography
See also
Collegiate secret societies in North America
External links
Thomas Jefferson's letter to Thomas McAuley regarding the F.H.C. Society, June 14, 1819.
Flat Hat History from The Flat Hat, William and Mary's student newspaper
Category:1750 establishments Category:College of William and Mary Category:Collegiate secret societies Category:United States student societies
Shhh! The Secret Side to the College&lt;U+2019&gt;s Lesser Known Societies - The DoG Street Journal↩
&quot;F.H.C. Society,&quot; University Archives Subject File Collection, Special Collections Research Center, Earl Gregg Swem Library, College of William and Mary↩
↩
Jane Carson, &quot;James Innes and His Brothers of the F.H.C.&quot;; Charlottesville, Virginia: The University Press of Virginia, 1965.↩
↩
