General Hastings Lionel &quot;Pug&quot; Ismay, 1st Baron Ismay, KG, GCB, CH, DSO, PC (21 June 1887&lt;U+2013&gt;17 December 1965) was a British soldier and diplomat, primarily remembered for his role as Winston Churchill's chief military adviser during World War Two, and his service as the first Secretary General of NATO from 1952 to 1957.
Ismay was born in India in 1887, but educated in the United Kingdom at the Charterhouse School and Royal Military College, Sandhurst. After Sandhurst, he joined the Indian Army as an officer of the 21st Prince Albert Victor's Own Cavalry. During World War One, he served with the Camel Corps in Somaliland, where he joined in the British fight against the &quot;Mad Mullah&quot;, Mohammed Abdullah Hassan. In 1925, Ismay became an Assistant Secretary of the Committee of Imperial Defence. After being promoted to the rank of colonel, Ismay served as the military secretary for Lord Willingdon, the Viceroy of India, then returned to the Committee of Imperial Defence as Deputy Secretary in 1936.
On August 1, 1938, shortly before the outbreak of World War Two, Ismay became the Secretary of the Committee of Imperial Defence and began planning for the impending war. In May 1940, when Winston Churchill became Prime Minister of the United Kingdom, he selected Ismay as his chief military adviser. In that capacity, Ismay served as the principal link between Churchill and the Chiefs of Staff Committee. Ismay also accompanied Churchill to many of the wartime Allied conferences. For his advice and aid, &quot;Churchill owed more, and admitted that he owed more&quot; to Ismay &quot;than to anybody else, military or civilian, in the whole of the war.&quot;1
After the end of the war, Ismay remained in the army for another year, and helped to reorganize the Ministry of Defence. After retiring from military life, he served as Lord Mountbatten's Chief of Staff in India and helped oversee the partition of India. From 1948 to 1951, he served as chairman of the council of the Festival of Britain, helping to organize and promote the event. Then, in 1951, when Churchill was again elected as Prime Minister, he appointed Ismay Secretary of State for Commonwealth Relations. Ismay accepted the position, but resigned after only six months to become the first Secretary General of NATO in 1952. He served as Secretary General until 1957, and helped to establish and define the position. After retiring from NATO, Ismay wrote his memoirs, The Memoirs of General Lord Ismay, served on a variety of corporate boards, and co-chaired the Ismay&lt;U+2013&gt;Jacob Committee, which reorganized the Ministry of Defence once again. He died on December 17, 1965, at his home in Broadway, Worcestershire.
Early life
Ismay was born in Nainital, India on June 21, 1887. His father, Sir Stanley Ismay was a member of the Viceroy's Legislative Council and his mother, Beatrice Ellen, was the daughter of an Army colonel.2 Ismay began his education in Britain at the Charterhouse School, and his parents hoped that after completing his education there, he would attend Cambridge and then enter the civil service.
Ismay, however, &quot;had a sneaking desire to be a cavalry soldier,&quot; and after doing poorly on his final examinations at Charterhouse, he was not eligible to attend Cambridge. As a result, Ismay entered the Royal Military College, Sandhurst in 1904.3 Ismay would later write that &quot;Sandhurst never meant nearly so much to me as Charterhouse had,&quot; but he enjoyed his time at the school and studied alongside many men who went on to become important military officers, including Lord Gort, Edgar Ludlow-Hewitt, and Cyril Newall.4
Indian Army
After completing the course at Sandhurst, Ismay placed fourth on its examinations and was commissioned as a second lieutenant in the Indian Army.5 Ismay then joined the Gloucestershire Regiment of the British Army in Ambala, where he served a one year mandatory apprenticeship. After leaving the regiment, Ismay did not immediately find a place in the Indian cavalry, so he spent nine months floating among positions with various British and Indian units.6
In 1907, Ismay found a place in the Indian cavalry, joining the 21st Prince Albert Victor's Own Cavalry,7 based at Risalpur. Ismay thoroughly enjoyed his time with the regiment, describing it as &quot;blissful.&quot;8 In 1908, he saw his first action with the regiment, when it was sent into Afghanistan, pursuing Mohmand raiders who had taken several Hindu women as hostages.9 Immediately after Ismay's regiment returned from action, he was hospitalized in Peshawar due to heat stroke, but he recovered quickly and, along with the rest of his regiment, received a medal for valor in combat.10
In 1910, after a reorganization of the Indian Army, Ismay's regiment moved from Risalpur to Jhelum. Shortly thereafter, Ismay was appointed the adjutant of his regiment, a position which he held for four years, during which time he also read voraciously and developed a great admiration for Winston Churchill, whom he sought to emulate.11
Somaliland
thumb|Medal card issued to Ismay for valor in Somaliland In early 1914, just before Ismay's appointment as adjutant was set to expire, he met C.A.L Howard, another British officer serving in India, who told him about an opportunity to serve with the King's African Rifles in British Somaliland. Ismay decided that this was &quot;just sort of job that [he] wanted,&quot; and applied immediately.12 Due to his reputation &quot;as a thorough and dependable officer, of sound judgment,&quot; Ismay was appointed second in command of the Somaliland Camel Corps, a cavalry unit led by Thomas Cubitt.13
Ismay left India for Somaliland in late July 1914, and arrived on August 9, shortly after the outbreak of World War One in Europe.14 Like other officers in Somaliland, Ismay was &quot;unhappy at being left out of the great war&quot;15 and repeatedly asked for a transfer to the European front.16 In the end, however, Ismay's superiors decided that he was &quot;so indispensable that, despite his longing for action in Europe, he was retained in Somaliland until 1920.&quot;17
In Somaliland, the Camel Corps and other British soldiers were ordered to subdue an uprising by the &quot;Mad Mullah&quot;, Mohammed Abdullah Hassan, who had been fighting against the British for more than twenty years. Ismay's commander, Thomas Cubitt, was determined to end the rebellion forcefully and quickly, so on November 17, 1914, he launched a major assault against Hassan's fortress at Shimber Berris.18 In the attack, Ismay fought closely alongside Adrian Carton de Wiart, later an important British officer in both World Wars.19 Not long after the attack on Shimber Berris, however, the Camel Corps received orders from London &quot;forbidding all offensive operations in Somaliland,&quot; due to the misfortunes of the Army elsewhere.20 As a result of this order, British operations were &quot;limited to watch and ward&quot; for the duration of the World War One, and the Camel Corps undertook no major offensives.21
Despite limited British activity, their few operations combined with the effort of local forces led to &quot;a drastic weakening&quot; of Hassan's forces by 1918.22 Thus, after the armistice ended World War One, the government sent Major-General Arthur Hoskins to take control of the forces in Somaliland and finish off Hassan once and for all.23 After Hoskins arrived, his initial plan for dealing with Hassan focused on the use of the newly-formed Royal Air Force, so Ismay and the Camel Corps were consigned to a minor role. Hoskins plans, however, were found &quot;overscaled and far too costly&quot;, so they were shelved throughout most of 1918 and 1919.24
thumb|One of Hassan's forts after RAF bombing In October 1919, plans for Hoskins's operation were finally approved,25 and on January 21, 1920, the attack against Hassan commenced.26 After several days of bombing, Ismay was ordered to lead an assault by the Camel Corps against Hassan's fortress at Jidali.27 On January 27, Ismay's forces first attempted the attack and were repulsed by strong resistance. That night, however, Hassan and his forces fled the city to take refuge in the countryside.28 Ismay was assigned to track down and capture Hassan, but he &quot;had no idea of where he was&quot;, and was forced to begin a large search.29 Ismay pursued Hassan for nearly two weeks, and managed to capture most of his &quot;personal following ... including seven of his older sons and several close relations.&quot;30 Nonetheless, Hassan himself managed to evade Ismay and on February 12, the effort to capture him was called off.31 Though Hassan was never captured, his power was broken, and he died in December 1920 of influenza.32 For his service in the effort, Ismay received the Distinguished Service Order and was twice mentioned in despatches.33
Interwar years
In April 1920, Ismay left Somaliland for England. While en route, he received word that he had been nominated for a place at the Indian Army's Staff College in Quetta. Depressed by the loss of life and destruction of the first World War, Ismay turned down the nomination, and &quot;was even seriously thinking of resigning [his] commission&quot; in the Army.34 After arriving in London, Ismay was given twelve months of medical leave, and &quot;soon gave up any idea of leaving the Army.&quot;35 After deciding to stay in the Army, Ismay attempted to reclaim his seat at the Staff College, but was told that it had already been given to someone else.
Service in India
While on medical leave, Ismay met Laura Kathleen Clegg, with whom he quickly fell in love.36 After four months, however, Ismay was proclaimed fit for duty, despite his remaining eight months of leave, and ordered back to India, where he rejoined his old regiment. His time back in India was relatively quiet, as there was &quot;no serious fighting&quot; in the area of his regiment at the time. In February 1921, Ismay took the qualifying exam for the Staff College in Rawalpindi, and passed, earning himself a seat for the next year. 37
In April, Ismay returned to London on leave, and married Clegg, with whom he eventually had three daughters.38 Ismay remained in London until February 1922, when he entered the Staff College.39 Ismay excelled at the staff college, and the commandant of the Staff College, called him &quot;one of the two best, if not the best, of the students who have passed through my hands.&quot;40 In his thesis at the Staff College, Ismay also correctly predicted that the next European war would be a total war, but he incorrectly predicted that cavalry would continue to play a role in warfare.41
After the Staff College, Ismay became Deputy Assistant Quartermaster General of the Indian Army.42 In that position, he worked closely with Claude Auchinleck, beginning a long-standing personal and professional relationship between the two.43 Ismay found that his work as Deputy Assistant Quartermaster General &quot;was a valuable experience,&quot; but did not enjoy it.44
Service in England
thumb|Maurice Hankey, Secretary of the Committee of Imperial Defence In 1924, Air Vice-Marshal Philip Game suggested to Ismay that he apply for a seat at the RAF Staff College, Andover. Although Ismay &quot;had no desire to learn to be a pilot&quot;, he was happy for the opportunity to return to England, and went to study at the college. 45 After Ismay completed the program, he was approached about the possibility of serving as Assistant Secretary of the Committee of Imperial Defence (CID) under Maurice Hankey. Ismay gladly accepted the position, beginning in December 1925. 46
As Assistant Secretary, Ismay directed several of the subcommittees of the Committee of Imperial Defence, including those for Censorship and War Emergency Legislation, Principal Supply Officers, and Co-ordination of Departmental Action. 47 As the Secretary of the Committee for the Co-ordination of Departmental Action, Ismay &quot;was responsible for seeing that all plans and preparations made by Government Departments or sub-committees of the CID to meet the eventuality of war, were incorporated under appropriate headings in a document known as the War Book.&quot;48 This task ended up consuming most of Ismay's time as Assistant Secretary, and gave him &quot;exceptional insight into the ways of Whitehall.&quot;49
While Assistant Secretary, Ismay made important friends, and gained the backing of Hankey, by whom he was &quot;greatly valued.&quot; Largely through Hankey's influence, Ismay was nominated as a Companion of the Most Honourable Order of the Bath,50 and awarded the honor in 1931.51
Lord Willingdon and the War Office
In December 1930, after five years, Ismay left his position at the CID.52 Ismay was promoted to the rank of Colonel53, and hoped to take command of the 12th Cavalry.54 Instead, he became the military secretary for Lord Willingdon, the newly appointed Viceroy of India.55
In this role, Ismay served as the &quot;unofficial link&quot; between Willingdon and the Indian Army. He also led Willingdon's personal staff, and organized his many trips throughout India. Ismay was also responsible for Willingdon's safety, and took precautions after he was threatened by assassins. 56 In December 1932, Ismay was informed that his duty with Willingdon was over, and that he would receive a position in the War Office during the next year.57
At the War Office, Ismay served as an intelligence officer with responsibility for the Middle East, Far East, the Americas, Russia, Poland and the Baltic States. Ismay enjoyed his work at the War Office, and wrote that &quot;intelligence is perhaps the most interesting of all Staff work.&quot;58 Nonetheless, his intelligence career was short-lived.
Committee of Imperial Defence
In 1936, Maurice Hankey became determined to &quot;bring Ismay in as his deputy and eventual successor&quot; at the CID.59 Hankey hoped that the appointment would &quot;strengthen the organization of the CID&quot; and enhance its influence, so he offered Ismay the position of Deputy Secretary.60 Although the appointment meant that Ismay would probably never command troops again, he viewed it is as an important opportunity and &quot;accepted with scarcely a moment's hesitation.&quot; A week thereafter, Ismay received a letter offering him the command of a cavalry brigade in India, but declined, solidifying his choice to remain a staff officer.61
As Deputy Secretary of the Committee of Imperial Defence, Ismay had broad responsibilities, and was &quot;concerned with every aspect of planning and preparation for a war which seemed imminent.&quot;62 Ismay dealt extensively with matters including the preparation of anti-aircraft defenses63 and coordination among the military services.64 As the crisis in Europe escalated; however, Hankey announced his intention to retire in June 1938.65 Hankey hoped that one person, preferably Ismay, would inherit all of the positions he had occupied, including Secretary of the CID, clerk of the Privy Council, and Secretary to the Cabinet, but the Prime Minister, Neville Chamberlain, decided that the positions should be split and assigned to different people.66
In the end, Ismay was named only to the position of Secretary of the Committee of Imperial Defence, effective August 1, 1938.67 Ismay assumed the position scarcely more than a year before the outbreak of World War Two, and the war totally dominated his time in office. Soon after he took office, Hitler initiated a crisis over the Sudetenland. While Chamberlain was at the Munich Conference, Ismay ordered the digging of trenches in London as protection against air attacks, should war occur.68 Ismay also would later say that he thought Britain should have gone to war at Munich instead of waiting, but his opinion was not widely shared at the time.69 As it became increasingly clear that war was inevitable in 1939, Ismay also prepared for a &quot;smooth, simple and practically instantaneous&quot; transition from the Committee of Imperial Defence to the War Cabinet, or other wartime authority.70
World War Two
With the outbreak of World War Two, the CID was immediately absorbed into the War Cabinet as Ismay had planned.71 In the midst of the turmoil, Ismay was promoted to Major General,72 and began to work closely with Chamberlain, accompanying him on a visit to France in December 1939.73 Ismay disagreed with several Allied strategic choices, including the decision to try to stop the German advance in Belgium, but kept his doubts to himself.74
Chiefs of Staff Committee
thumb|Winston Churchill with the Chiefs of Staff, including Ismay In April 1940, Winston Churchill took control of the Military Co-ordination Committee, charged with overseeing all of the military services. He selected Ismay as his chief staff officer, which also gave Ismay the additional responsibility of serving on the Chiefs of Staff Committee.75 While serving under Churchill had been a life-long dream for Ismay who admired him greatly, he was initially skeptical about the duties of his new position, which seemed unclear.76
On May 10, after the beginning of the Battle of France, Chamberlain resigned, and Churchill became both Prime Minister and Minister of Defence.77 Ismay, who later called Churchill &quot;the greatest War Prime Minister in our history&quot;, was &quot;thrilled&quot; by this development, and continued to act as Churchill's chief staff officer and military adviser.78 According to Churchill, the two developed a close &quot;personal and official connection [that] was preserved unbroken and unweakened&quot; throughout the war.79 From the very moment he became Prime Minister, Churchill &quot;relied heavily on General Pug Ismay,&quot; who provided a crucial bridge to the military establishment.80 Ismay served as the &quot;principal assistant to Mr. Churchill in his capacity as Minister of Defence&quot;, continued to serve as the Secretary of the Imperial Defence Chiefs of Staff Committee,81 and became Deputy Secretary of the War Cabinet.82 Ismay was crucial to running the war effort, as he was able to effectively link the military and civilian leadership. Jock Colville, Churchill's private secretary, wrote that Ismay had the &quot;tact, patience, and skill in promoting compromise&quot; needed to keep the war running smoothly.&quot;83 Ismay had the additional advantage of being admired by the Service Chiefs for his long and distinguished record as a soldier.84
In his role, Ismay handled &quot;nearly all military messages&quot; from Churchill to the Service Chiefs.85 Ismay also gave Churchill advice on military matters, and often &quot;begged him to be reasonable&quot;86 when he contemplated foolish actions, believing that Churchill's greatest fault was his &quot;impetuous nature and impatience with opposition.&quot;87 When the Chiefs of Staff found Churchill's demands unfeasible, Ismay took the role of &quot;converting the Prime Minister&quot; to their viewpoint.88
Not long after Churchill became Prime Minister, he used his influence to have Ismay decorated as a Knight Commander of the Order of the Bath in June 1940.89
Allied Conferences
In his role as Churchill's chief military adviser, Ismay traveled frequently with him to wartime conferences and meetings. Ismay also attended many Allied conferences without Churchill, and frequently accompanied other British leaders such as Foreign Minister Anthony Eden on their travels.
In 1941, Ismay went with Lord Beaverbrook to the first Moscow Conference.90 Because English participation in the conference was a secret, Ismay faked influenza to explain his absence from London while it was taking place.91 The Conference was the first time that Ismay worked closely with the Americans, whom he found &quot;quite congenial.&quot;92
Ismay would continue to work closely with the Americans throughout the remainder of the war, and he accompanied Churchill on his 1942 trip to the United States.93 Shortly after Ismay returned from the United States with Churchill, General Eisenhower arrived in Britain to command the American forces. He established close relations with Ismay, who liked him greatly, and assisted him in coordinating with both British forces and the Cabinet.94 Eisenhower thought highly of Ismay, remembering him for his &quot;stalwart support&quot;, and calling him a man &quot;of great ability.&quot;95 Not long after Eisenhower arrived, on August 16, 1942, Ismay was promoted to the rank of Lieutenant General.96 Ismay's good relations with the Americans were recognized by many others, so in November 1942, when Eleanor Roosevelt visited Britain, Lady Ismay was chosen to host her for one night of her stay.97
1943 Conferences
thumb|200px|Ismay (top left) with Roosevelt, Churchill and Admiral Mountbatten at the Casablanca Conference In January 1943, Ismay accompanied Churchill to the Casablanca Conference.98 Ismay attended nearly all of the proceedings of the Conference, and helped work towards consensus where the Americans and British disagreed on issues.99 Ismay was also appointed to the committee which wrote the formal report of the conference. 100 After the conference, Ismay visited the American headquarters in Algiers to meet with Eisenhower, and helped resolved some differences of opinion between Eisenhower and his British colleagues.101
After Casablance, Ismay accompanied Churchill to the third Washington Conference in May 1943.102 At the conference, Ismay first met the American Admiral William D. Leahy, who is often described as his American counterpart. The two developed a friendly relationship, and Leahy wrote in his memoirs: &quot;General Sir Hastings Ismay became my favorite, perhaps because his position closely paralleled my own&quot;.103
After the Washington Conference came the Quebec Conference in August 1943. Once again, Ismay attended along with Churchill.104 The Quebec Conference was the first time that the Allied leaders discussed the full details of Operation Overlord, so Ismay spent much of his time explaining details of the operation to Churchill.105 During the conference, Ismay observed that Dudley Pound &quot;had had a breakdown&quot;. He took the information to Churchill who demanded Pound's resignation a week later.106
Shortly after returning from Quebec, Ismay participated in his next conference, traveling with Anthony Eden to the Moscow Conference in October and November, where he served as Eden's top military adviser.107 At the conference, Ismay handled all of the Russian questions about the planning for Operation Overlord,108 and met Joseph Stalin personally for the first time.109 After the conference, Ismay wrote that he &quot;was optimistic about [sic] post-war relations with Russia,&quot; showing his belief that the meeting had gone well.110
Only four days after returning from the Moscow Conference, Ismay left again for the Cairo Conference and Teheran Conference with Churchill. 111 One major source of conflict at the Cairo Conference was an American proposal to appoint an overall commander for the strategic bombing of Germany. Ismay and the British were strongly opposed, and Ismay wrote a long paper against the idea, which became the basis of British policy on the subject.112 At Teheran, Ismay helped to argue the case for Operation Overlord, but immediately after the conference he developed bronchitis and returned to England by ship.113
1944&lt;U+2013&gt;1945
thumb|Ismay with Sir John Simon in 1945 In the first several months of 1944, Ismay spent almost all of his time planning for the Normandy Landings.114 In March, Duncan Sandys, Churchill's nephew, told Ismay that Basil Liddell Hart, a strategist and historian, had discovered the secret plans for the Normandy landings. This development had the potential to compromise the entire operation, so Ismay personally interviewed Liddell Hart, who claimed to have simply &quot;worked it all out for himself&quot; without any access to secret information.115 After their interview, Ismay directed the matter to the MI5, who never found evidence of wrongdoing.
On May 20, 1944, less than a month before the Normandy Landings were scheduled to take place, Ismay was promoted to the rank of full general.116 After the successful D-Day landings, King George VI decided to visit the troops in Normandy, and selected Ismay to accompany him on the visit.117 In September, Ismay accompanied Churchill to another conference, the Second Quebec Conference.118 Ismay also accompanied Churchill on his visits to Moscow and Paris in late 1944.119
In February 1945, Ismay attended the Yalta Conference. He found the conference different from the previous ones where &quot;the military element had been the prima donna, occupying the centre of the stage.&quot;120 Instead, at Yalta, political issues took precedence, leaving Ismay and other military advisers &quot;waiting for calls that never came.&quot;121
On VE Day, Ismay found it &quot;quite impossible to be completely happy about the future,&quot; due to the lingering Japanese threat, and the rising threat of the Soviet Union.122 Nonetheless, he was happy to be one of only three men to hold the same high government position throughout the war in Europe, along with Edward Bridges, 1st Baron Bridges and the King.123
Post-War Military Service
After VE Day, Ismay accompanied Churchill to the Potsdam Conference. The conference focused primarily on political issues, so there was little for Ismay to do.124 After Clement Atlee defeated Churchill in the 1945 election, becoming Prime Minister, Ismay worked for Atlee, but remained loyal to Churchill.125 Ismay and Churchill remained friends for the remainder of their lives, and Ismay even helped Churchill write his memoirs.
Shortly after the Potsdam Conference, the war in Asia ended as well on VJ Day. After this victory, Ismay &quot;would have liked to retire at once,&quot;126 but at Atlee's request he remained in office for another year.127 Before continuing work; however, Ismay traveled to New York on September 6, for a six week vacation in America.128
Over the next year, Ismay worked largely on the issue of reform to the Ministry of Defence. From December 1945 to February 1946, Ismay worked with a small committee to draft the Statement Relating to Defence, which formed the basis of reforms implemented by Atlee later that year.129 For his role, Ismay became known as the &quot;chief architect&quot; of the post-war Ministry of Defence.&quot;130
During the year following the war, Ismay also received many honors for his service. In August 1945, as part of Churchill's resignation, he was appointed to the Order of the Companions of Honour.131 The next January, he received the Legion of Merit from the United States.132 He was also named a Knight Grand Cross of the Order of Bath in June.133 Ismay was also named the Chairman of the Council of the Royal National Institute for the Blind.134
In November 1946, Ismay announced his intention to retire.135 Atlee accepted his retirement, effective on December 31, 1946.136 Immediately after retiring, on January 1, 1947, Ismay was created a baron as Baron Ismay of Wormington.137 He accepted the baronetcy and took his seat in the House of Lords in February.138
Partition of India
thumb|Lord Mountbatten, the last Viceroy of India, with Mohandas Gandhi Shortly after Ismay's retirement, Lord Mountbatten was appointed as the last British Viceroy of India and Ismay offered to serve as his Chief of Staff.139 Thus, in March 1947, Ismay left with Mountbatten for India to help preside over its transition to independence.140 After arriving in India, Ismay soon came to the conclusion that the situation was dire, and heading for civil war, telling Mountbatten that &quot;India was a ship on fire in mid-ocean with ammunition in her hold.&quot;141
When Ismay and Mountbatten arrived, they were committed to preserving a unified India, but Ismay soon realized &quot;that the Moslem League would not agree to any plan which did not provide for the creation of Pakistan as an independent sovereign state.&quot;142 In April, after several unsuccessful meetings with Muhammad Ali Jinnah, Mountbatten came to the same conclusion and began drawing up plans for the partition.143 Over the next month, Mountbatten finalized the plan, and on May 2, 1947, he sent Ismay back to London to present the plan to the government.144 Ismay presented the plan to the Prime Minister and Cabinet, casting the partition as a Hobson's choice.145 Ismay stayed in England for the next month, and helped to alter the plan based on the cabinet's suggestions, before returning to India on May 31.146
Once the partition plan had been accepted, Ismay worked on implementing the details. In particular, Ismay dealt with the issue of dividing the Indian Army. Based on his own experiences and love of the Indian Army, Ismay did his &quot;utmost to persuade&quot; the leaders of the new Indian and Pakistani states not to separate the army immediately. His efforts, however, failed due to the oppostion of Jinnah.147
Ismay also traveled to Kashmir to ask Hari Singh to hold a referendum over whether his territory would join India or Pakistan. Once again, Ismay was unsuccessful and Singh &quot;changed the subject&quot; each time that Ismay tried to discuss the referendum.148 Throughout the period immediately following independence, Ismay also tried to ensure that stories printed in the Indian and Pakistani press about the partition were accurate, but once again he was largely unsuccessful.149
Although the situation in India continued to deteriorate throughout the summer and autumn of 1947, Ismay had reached an agreement with Mountbatten that he would only stay for three to four months after the partition. Thus, in December 1947, he left India to return to his retirement in England.150 Shortly after his return, Ismay served briefly on the British delegation to the United Nations to deal with the Kashmir issue. Ismay, however, was suspected &quot;of being 'tarred with the Delhi brush'&quot;, so he played only a limited role. 151
Festival of Britain
Shortly after Ismay returned from the United Nations, Prime Minister Atlee asked him to become the Chairman of the Council of the Festival of Britain, scheduled to take place in 1951.152 Ismay accepted the offer, and on March 10, 1948 he officially took the position of chairman.153 Ismay's appointment was largely a symbolic one, and he &quot;was at least partly appointed to forestall potential criticism by his friend Winston Churchill.&quot; The Council, however, wielded &quot;slight, but not insignificant influence&quot; and Ismay's took his duties on it seriously.154
Ismay helped to ensure that the festival would be truly national in character, rather than just confined to London. As such, in June 1949, he called together all of the mayors in Britain to discuss the festival, the first meeting of all British mayors since 1916.155 Ismay also publicly defended the large cost of the festival, and emphasized its historic nature, saying, &quot;We are consciously and deliberately determined to make history.&quot;156 Once the festival opened, Ismay hosted various notable guests of the festival, including Margaret Truman, the daughter of US President Harry Truman.157
Secretary of State for Commonwealth Relations
In the 1951 general election held shortly after the conclusion of the Festival of Britain, Churchill's Conservative Party once again won a majority, making Churchill Prime Minister for a second time. The day after the election, Churchill asked Ismay to become the Secretary of State for Commonwealth Relations in his cabinet. Ismay &quot;was overjoyed at the prospect of serving under Churchill again&quot; and accepted the post immediately.158
Because of his background and experience, Ismay became &quot;more closely involved in defence matters than is usual for a Secretary of State for Commonwealth Relations,&quot; and often served as de facto Minister of Defence.159 Because of his close involvement in defense matters, Ismay began to be involved with the North Atlantic Treaty Organization. In January 1952, he accompanied Churchill to a meeting in Ottawa about the alliance, 160 and in February 1952 he attended the NATO Lisbon Conference as the British Ministry of Defence representative.161 When leaving the conference, Ismay remarked to Alfred Gruenther, &quot;this is the first that I have seen of NATO, and thank heaven it's the last.&quot;162
Secretary General of NATO
At the Lisbon Conference, the members of NATO agreed to appoint a Secretary General who would direct the organization's staff and serve as Vice Chairman of the Atlantic Council. The position was initially offered to Sir Oliver Franks, but he declined.163 As such, the allies scrambled to find someone else to take the position. Two weeks later, the countries agreed to ask Ismay to become Secretary General.
Anthony Eden asked Ismay to accept the position, but his response &quot;was an immediate and emphatic negative.&quot;164 Churchill then personally asked Ismay to accept the position, telling him that &quot;NATO provided the best, if not the only, hope of peace in our time,&quot;165 and after further urging, Ismay reluctantly accepted the job. On March 12, 1952, the Atlantic Council officially passed a resolution appointing Ismay Secretary General,166 and he started work on March 24.167
Ismay's appointment to the position was well-received, enjoying the unanimous support of all the NATO members. The press and public also responded favorably. The Times wrote &quot;of all the candidates whose names have been mentioned, Lord Ismay would seem to have the strongest qualifications for the post.&quot;168 The New York Times applauded his &quot;vast experience in military planning, strategy, and administration,&quot;169 and the Washington Post wrote that Ismay would bring NATO &quot;great authority, experience and energy and a personal charm that can dissolve difficulties.&quot;170
As the first Secretary-General, Ismay was &quot;assuming an entirely new role in the history of international organizations,&quot; and as such he helped to define the position itself.171 While Ismay &quot;deemed it wise not to step too boldly in a political role&quot; in disputes among the members, he asserted himself strongly on issues relevant to the organization of NATO.172 From the very beginning of his time in office, Ismay worked to empower the permanent representatives to NATO, and emphasized that they had the same legal authority to make decisions as the NATO foreign ministers.173 Ismay was also a proponent of NATO expansion, saying that NATO &quot;must grow until the entire free world gets under one umbrella.&quot;174
As Secretary General, Ismay also worked to encourage closer political coordination among the members of the alliance. During the Suez Crisis he offered his good offices to help resolve issues among members of the alliance.175 Ismay also offered to help mediate disputes over Cyprus.176
In December 1956, Ismay decided to retire from NATO. He told the press that &quot;he was not giving up his position for personal reasons, but because he felt it needed a fresh hand and a fresh brain.&quot;177 Paul-Henri Spaak was immediately chosen as his successor, but Ismay remained in office until May 1957, when he left with &quot;the affection and respect&quot; of all the NATO members.178
While Secretary General, Ismay is also credited as having been the first person to say that the purpose of the alliance was &quot;to keep the Russians out, the Americans in, and the Germans down,&quot; a saying that has since become quite common.179180
Retirement
Immediately after leaving NATO, Ismay was honored by Queen Elizabeth II with an appointment to the Order of the Garter.181 He was also appointed to boards of several corporations, including the Ashanti Goldfields Corporation.182 Ismay also began writing his memoirs, The Memoirs of General Lord Ismay, which he published in 1960. In his memoirs, Ismay focused principally on his World War Two service, and as such, one reviewer called them &quot;a most significant addition to the literature of the Second World War.&quot;183
In 1963, Ismay was asked to again assist in a review of the organization of the British military along with Sir Ian Jacob.184 Although Ismay was ill throughout most of the review and did relatively little of the work, &quot;his influence was strong,&quot; and the final product of the review largely reflected his opinions.185 In the end, the Ismay&lt;U+2013&gt;Jacob Report recommended strengthening the central power of the Ministry of Defence substantially, and in 1964, Parliament implemented its recommendations.186
Ismay died on December 17, 1965 at his home in Broadway, Worcestershire at the age of 78. As he had no male heir, his title became extinct.187
Notes
References
Books
News articles
cs:Hastings Lionel Ismay da:Lord Ismay de:Hastings Ismay, 1. Baron Ismay fr:Hastings Lionel Ismay it:Hastings Lionel Ismay nl:Hastings Lionel Ismay pl:Hastings Lionel Ismay ru:&lt;U+0418&gt;&lt;U+0441&gt;&lt;U+043C&gt;&lt;U+0435&gt;&lt;U+0439&gt;, &lt;U+0413&gt;&lt;U+0430&gt;&lt;U+0441&gt;&lt;U+0442&gt;&lt;U+0438&gt;&lt;U+043D&gt;&lt;U+0433&gt;&lt;U+0441&gt; &lt;U+041B&gt;&lt;U+0430&gt;&lt;U+0439&gt;&lt;U+043E&gt;&lt;U+043D&gt;&lt;U+0435&gt;&lt;U+043B&gt; sv:Hastings Lionel Ismay
Category:1887 births Category:1965 deaths Category:Barons in the Peerage of the United Kingdom Category:British Indian Army World War II generals Category:Companions of the Distinguished Service Order Category:Knights Grand Cross of the Order of the Bath Category:Knights of the Garter Category:Members of the Order of the Companions of Honour Category:NATO Secretaries General Category:British colonial army officers Category:Sandhurst graduates Category:Old Carthusians Category:British military personnel of the Fifth Somaliland Expedition Category:People from Nainital
Colville, p. 161↩
Oxbury, p. 180↩
Ismay, p. 3↩
Ismay, p. 4↩
Ismay, p.5↩
ODNB, p. 438↩
Ismay, p.9↩
Ismay, pp. 12&lt;U+2013&gt;13↩
Ismay, pp. 14&lt;U+2013&gt;15↩
Ismay, pp. 16&lt;U+2013&gt;17↩
Ismay, p. 18↩
Beachley, p. 106↩
Ismay, p. 19↩
Ismay, p.24↩
Ismay, pp. 35&lt;U+2013&gt;36↩
Beachley, p.106↩
Ismay, pp. 24&lt;U+2013&gt;25↩
Beachley, p. 109↩
Ismay, p. 28↩
Ismay, pp.28&lt;U+2013&gt;29↩
Beachley, p.124↩
Ismay, p. 29↩
Beachely, pp. 124&lt;U+2013&gt;125↩
Beachley, p.130↩
Beachley, p. 133↩
Beachley, p. 136↩
Ismay, p. 31↩
Ismay, p. 32↩
Ismay, p.34↩
Beachley, p. 142↩
Beachley, p. 153↩
&quot;Sir M. Hankey's Successors&quot;↩
Ismay, p. 36↩
Ismay, p. 37↩
Ismay, p. 38↩
Ismay, p. 39↩
&quot;Lord Ismay, Ex-Churchill Aide, Leader in NATO, Is Dead at 78&quot;↩
Ismay, p. 40↩
Ismay, p. 41↩
Ismay, pp. 41&lt;U+2013&gt;42↩
Ismay, p. 53↩
Ismay, pp. 55&lt;U+2013&gt;56↩
Roskill (Volume 1), p. 531↩
ODNB, p. 439↩
Ismay, p. 63↩
Ismay, p. 64↩
Ismay, p. 66↩
Ismay, p. 68↩
Ismay, p. 69↩
Roskill (Volume 3)↩
Naylor, p. 243↩
Ismay, p. 70↩
Ismay, p. 77↩
Ismay, p. 80↩
Ismay, p. 84↩
Ismay, p. 89↩
Naylor, p. 261↩
&quot;Sir M. Hankey's Successors&quot;↩
Ismay, p. 91↩
Colville, p. 165↩
&quot;Advice on Defence: Imperial Committee in Peace and War&quot;↩
Naylor, p. 268↩
Ismay, p. 103↩
Ismay, p. 104↩
Ismay, p. 113↩
Ismay, p. 115↩
Ismay, p. 117↩
Churchill (1948), p. 645↩
Lamb, p. 45↩
&quot;Prime Minister in the United States&quot;↩
&quot;General Ismay Promoted&quot;↩
Colville, p. 161↩
Colville, pp. 161&lt;U+2013&gt;162↩
Churchill (1949), p. 22↩
Gilbert, p. 662↩
Colville, p. 165↩
Colville, p.163↩
&quot;Knighthoods for the Services&quot;↩
&quot;Prime Minister in the United States&quot;↩
Ismay, p. 230↩
Ismay, p. 235↩
&quot;Prime Minister in the United States&quot;↩
Ismay, pp. 259&lt;U+2013&gt;260↩
Eisenhower, Dwight p.446↩
&quot;General Ismay Promoted&quot;↩
&quot;Women's Part in the War&quot;↩
&quot;Mr. Churchill Meets Mr. Roosevelt&quot;↩
Ismay, pp. 286&lt;U+2013&gt;287↩
US Department of State Historical Office, p. 640↩
Ismay, p. 291↩
Ismay, p. 293↩
Leahy, p. 163↩
&quot;The Prime Minister in Canada&quot;↩
Ismay, p. 310↩
Ismay, p. 316↩
&quot;Mr. Eden at Kremlin&quot;↩
Ismay, p. 327↩
&quot;Mr. Eden sees Marshal Stalin&quot;↩
Ismay, p. 328↩
Ismay, p. 332↩
Sainsbury p.208↩
Ismay, p.342↩
Ismay, p. 343↩
Evans↩
&quot;Sir H Ismay Promoted&quot;↩
&quot;Allied Chiefs with The King&quot;↩
Ismay, p. 372↩
Ismay, p. 376↩
Ismay, p. 387↩
Ismay, p. 395↩
Ismay, pp. 395&lt;U+2013&gt;396↩
Ismay, p. 399↩
Ismay, pp. 403&lt;U+2013&gt;404↩
Ismay, p. 404↩
&quot;The Queen Mary Sails with 15,000 Troops&quot;↩
Johnson, p. 18↩
Johnson, p. 67↩
&quot;Resignation Honours&quot;↩
&quot;British Officers Decorated&quot;↩
&quot;The Birthday Honors&quot;↩
&quot;News in Brief&quot;↩
Ismay, p. 406↩
&quot;Cabinet Staff Change&quot;↩
&quot;The New Years Honours List&quot;↩
&quot;House of Lords&quot;↩
Ismay, pp. 409&lt;U+2013&gt;410↩
&quot;New Viceroy in Delhi&quot;↩
Collins, p. 95↩
Ismay, p. 419↩
Collins, p. 120↩
Collins, p. 134↩
Ismay, pp. 420&lt;U+2013&gt;421↩
Ismay, pp. 421&lt;U+2013&gt;422↩
Ismay, p. 428↩
Ismay, p. 433↩
Ismay, p. 442↩
Ismay, pp. 445&lt;U+2013&gt;446↩
Ismay, p. 447↩
Ismay, p. 448↩
&quot;Lord Ismay Appointed&quot;↩
Leventhal, p. 447↩
Conekin, p. 153↩
&quot;Scope of 1951 Festival&quot;↩
&quot;Miss Truman at South Bank Exhibition&quot;↩
Ismay, p. 453↩
&quot;Discussions in Ottawa&quot;↩
&quot;Meeting of Foreign Ministers&quot;↩
Ismay, p. 460↩
Daniel (February 28, 1952)↩
Ismay, p. 461↩
&quot;N.A.T.O. Secretary General&quot;↩
&quot;Atlantic Council Deputies&quot;↩
Daniel (March 13, 1952)↩
&quot;Secretary Ismay&quot;↩
Jordan, p. 3↩
&quot;Obituary: Lord Ismay&quot;↩
Jordan, p. 65↩
&quot;Dulles Gives Pledge to Save Allied Unity&quot;↩
&quot;M Spaak to Succeed Lord Ismay&quot;↩
Joffe↩
Schorr↩
&quot;Court Circular&quot; (May 16, 1957)↩
&quot;Commodity Markets&quot;↩
O'Dea, p. 300↩
&quot;Ismay to Study Service Unity&quot;↩
Johnson, p. 110↩
Johnson, p. 115↩
&quot;First Chief of NATO, Lord Ismay, 78, Dies&quot;↩
