Islamic Association of Palestine (IAP) was an Islamist organization that raised money in the United States for Hamas. It purported to write articles of a factual nature on issues that &quot;Zionist controlled&quot; westernized media failed to report. It called itself &quot;a not-for-profit, public-awareness, educational, political, social, and civic, national grassroots organization dedicated to advancing a just, comprehensive, and eternal solution to the cause of Palestine and suffrages of the Palestinians.&quot; For a time it also used the name American Muslim Society.1
Founders include:2
Mousa Mohammed Abu Marzook, funder and 1989 member of IAP Board of Directors, Specially Designated Global Terrorist.3
Sami Al-Arian, cofounder of Islamic Society of North America and supporter of Palestinian Islamic Jihad.
It published a magazine, Tareeq Filistine (Road to Palestine), Ila Filastin,4 and newspapers Al-Zaytuna and Muslim World Monitor.
It had been accused of issuing anti-Semitic propaganda and having links to terrorists by the ADL.
The U.S. government considers the IAP a front for Hamas in the United States.
In December 2004, a federal judge in the U.S. city of Chicago ruled that the IAP (along with the Holy Land Foundation) was liable for a $156 million dollar lawsuit for aiding and abetting the terror group Hamas in the death of a 17-year-old David Boim, an American citizen. Though IAP has already had its assets frozen by the U.S. executive branch of the government, this was the first time a U.S. court officially linked IAP to Hamas.56
The organization was the parent organization of Council on American-Islamic Relations, or CAIR.78910
KindHearts listed the IPA as its &quot;Fundraiser Organizer&quot; in its tax exemption filings.11
References
External links
iap.org was the IAP domain name until after February 2005.
Site Institute - See also Site institute
&quot;Jury awards $156M to family of teen in slain in West Bank&quot;
&quot;Death of a Terror Lobby&quot; by Joe Kaufman, Front Page Magazine, February 3, 2006.
Category:Charities based in the United States Category:Islamic organizations Category:Charities accused of ties to terrorism Category:Islamic activist organizations Category:Terrorism in the United States
CAIR: Islamists Fooling the Establishment The Middle East Quarterly↩
Testimony of Steven Emerson Before the United States Senate Committee of Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs &quot;Money Laundering and Terror Financing Issues in the Middle East.&quot; July 13, 2005↩
↩
http://web.archive.org/web/20030622094859/http://www.iap.org/contactus.htm IAP Board Of Directors / Shura Council↩
http://www.washington-report.org/backissues/1099/9910067.html Rafeeq Jaber: An Energetic Muslim Visionary and Fearless Palestinian-American Political Activist↩
