  Leech collectors, leech gatherers, or leech finders met the growing demand for medicinal leeches in 19th-century Europe. Leeches were used in bloodletting but were not easy for medical practitioners to obtain. The collector would sometimes gather the leeches by attracting them to the legs of animals, often old horses. More commonplace was for the collector to use their own legs, gathering the leech after it had finished sucking enough blood. Many in the profession suffered from the effects of the loss of blood and infections spread by the leeches.1
Leech collectors were active across the United Kingdom, with bogs and marshes being the best hunting ground. The Lake District and Somerset Levels had particularly suitable sites. They were described by artist George Walker in his 1814 book The Costume of Yorkshire as being predominately Scottish women.2
The career was seasonal; leech collectors could not work in the colder months because the leeches would not be particularly active.3
There are obvious negative effects of being repeatedly bitten by leeches, most commonly the significant and dangerous levels of blood loss. The leeches would suck on the legs of the collector for 20 minutes or more, and even when they had finished the resultant wound continued to bleed for up to ten hours.4
Leech collectors were not well paid. William Wordsworth's poem Resolution and Independence, written in 1802 and published in 1807, was inspired by an encounter Wordsworth had with a &quot;leech-gatherer&quot;.5 In Stanza XV he describes the hardships that the old, poor leech collector had endured:
Parts of the poem have been interpreted as drawing similarities between leech collectors and poets,6 comparing the difficulties of finding leeches with the struggle to write poetry.7 The old man in the story is said to &quot;have wisdom and fortitude that can elevate the wiser poet&quot;.8
Decline
Hirudo medicinalis, the only species of leech in Britain that can suck human blood,9 is identified as being &quot;Near Threatened&quot; by the IUCN. Their decline dates back to the time of the collectors and Wordsworth refers to the fall in their numbers in Resolution and Independence Stanza XVIII:
The collection of leeches became a sizeable industry by the mid-19th century: 30 million were exported from Germany to America annually and French imports of H. medicinalis in 1833 were in the region of 42 million. By the turn of the 20th century H. medicinalis was thought to be extinct in the British Isles, but they were rediscovered in parts of Great Britain from 1970 onwards. The dramatic drop in numbers was blamed partly on the over-collection of the species but also on the dramatic reduction of their habitat. The largest population currently in Britain is believed to reside in the Romney Marsh.10
The leech collecting industry also declined as the medicinal value of using leeches was questioned.
References
External links
Maggots and leeches make a comeback, Science in Africa
Category:Healthcare occupations Category:History of medicine Category:Traditional medicine
Leech collectors, Science Museum. Accessed 2 September 2011.↩
Robinson, Tony. The Worst Jobs in History. Pan. ISBN 0330438573 p.54&lt;U+2013&gt;56.↩
Wordsworth, Dorothy. The Grasmere Journals. Edited by Pamela Woof. Oxford University Press, 1991.↩
Wordsworth's Poetry. SparkNotes. Accessed 2 September 2011.↩
Durrant, Geoffrey. William Wordsworth. Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0521076080. 1 September 1969. p. 95↩
Moore, Pamela. Wordsworth, William - Resolution and Independence. Literature, Arts, and Medicine Database, New York University. 7 May 2001. Accessed 2 September 2011.↩
Medicinal Leech (Hirudo medicinalis) In the Romney Marsh Natural Area. Romney Marsh Countryside Project. Accessed 2 September 2011.↩
