Rushcliffe is a constituency{{#tag:ref|A county constituency (for the purposes of election expenses and type of returning officer)|group= n}} represented in the House of Commons of the UK Parliament since 1970 by Ken Clarke, a Conservative.{{#tag:ref|As with all constituencies, the constituency elects one Member of Parliament (MP) by the first past the post system of election at least every five years.|group= n}}
History
The constituency was formed by the Redistribution of Seats Act 1885 (for first use during the election that year).
Since 1950 it has been a safe seat for the Conservative Party whose members have held it without marginal majorities except for a four-year period when it was held by Labour from 1966 coinciding with the First Wilson Ministry. Unlike other constituencies nearby, such as Broxtowe and Gedling, which were previously held by the Conservatives, they retained Rushcliffe in the 1997 New Labour landslide. This was at the time attributed in part to its more rural nature, but also to the personal popularity of the incumbent MP, Conservative Kenneth Clarke.
Boundaries
The constituency covers the south of Nottinghamshire. Its boundaries match those of the borough of Rushcliffe, typically to the north by the River Trent and to the south by the county border.
Boundary review
Following their review of parliamentary representation in Nottinghamshire, the Boundary Commission's report approved by Parliament led to minor modifications to the existing constituency{{#tag:ref|The area around Bingham will became part of the Newark.|group= n}} for the 2010 general election onwards.
The seat has electoral wards:
Abbey, Compton Acres, Cotgrave, Edwalton Village, Gamston, Gotham, Keyworth North, Keyworth South, Lady Bay, Leake, Lutterell, Manvers, Melton, Musters, Nevile, Ruddington, Soar Valley, Stanford, Tollerton, Trent, Trent Bridge, Wiverton, and Wolds in the borough of Rushcliffe
Constituency profile
The main town in the constituency is West Bridgford, which is part of the Greater Nottingham urban area, and includes the Trent Bridge cricket ground and Nottingham Forest F.C.. The remainder of the constituency is predominantly rural, although includes the town of Bingham and villages of Cotgrave, East Bridgford, East Leake, Sutton Bonington, Keyworth, Radcliffe on Trent and Ruddington.
The constituency consists of Census Output Areas of one local government district with a working population whose income is close to the national average and has lower than average reliance upon social housing.1 At the end of 2012 the unemployment rate in the constituency stood as 1.9% of the population claiming jobseekers allowance, compared to the regional average of 3.5%.2 The borough contributing to the bulk of the seat has a low 15.1% of its population without a car, 16.4% of the population without qualifications and a very high 39.0% with level 4 qualifications or above. In terms of tenure a high 76.7% of homes are owned outright or on a mortgage as at the 2011 census across the district.3
Members of Parliament
Kenneth Clarke
Since 1970, Rushcliffe's Member of Parliament has been one of Britain's prominent political figures, Kenneth Clarke of the Conservative Party.
Clarke was Chancellor of the Exchequer from 1993 to 1997, ran to be party leader during opposition under the Blair Ministry, then became Shadow Secretary of State for Business from 2009 to 2010 and then took de facto joined role of Secretary of State for Justice and Lord Chancellor from 2010 as the Lord Chancellor lost in the previous administration the requirement to be a leading judge and sit in the judiciary's highest court as well as a conventionally apolitical role in the House of Lords, in which the holder no longer sits.{{#tag:ref|Commentators questioned Lord Falconer its first revised holder whether the title should be abolished.|group= n}}
Election
Member4
Party
Notes
1885
John Ellis
Liberal
Dec 1910
Leif Jones
Liberal
1918
Rt. Hon. Henry Betterton
Coalition Conservative
1922
Conservative
1934 by-election
Rt. Hon. Ralph Assheton
Conservative
1945
Florence Paton
Labour
1950
Rt. Hon. Martin Redmayne
Conservative
1966
Antony Gardner
Labour
1970
Rt. Hon. Kenneth Clarke
Conservative
Elections
Elections in the 2010s
Elections in the 2000s
Elections in the 1990s
Elections in the 80s
See also
List of Parliamentary constituencies in Nottinghamshire
Notes and References
Notes
References
Category:Parliamentary constituencies in Nottinghamshire Category:United Kingdom Parliamentary constituencies established in 1885 Category:Rushcliffe
2001 Census↩
Unemployment claimants by constituency The Guardian↩
2011 census interactive maps↩
↩
