The 2008 congressional elections in Kansas were held on November 4, 2008 to determine who would represent the state of Kansas in the United States House of Representatives, coinciding with the presidential and senatorial elections. Representatives are elected for two-year terms; those elected will serve in the 111th Congress from January 3, 2009 until January 3, 2011.
Kansas has four seats in the House, apportioned according to the 2000 United States Census. Its 2007-2008 congressional delegation consisted of two Republicans and two Democrats. It is now three Republicans and one Democrat. District 2 was the only seat which changed party (from Democratic to Republican), although CQ Politics had forecasted districts 2 and 3 to be at some risk for the incumbent party.
The primary elections for Republican Party and Democratic Party candidates were held on August 5.1
Match-up summary
District
Incumbent
2008 Status
Democratic
Republican
Libertarian
Reform
Independent
1
|Jerry Moran
Re-election
James Bordonaro
|Jerry Moran
Jack Warner
Kathleen M. Burton
2
|Nancy Boyda
Re-election
Nancy Boyda
|Lynn Jenkins
Robert Garrard
Leslie Martin
3
|Dennis Moore
Re-election
|Dennis Moore
Nick Jordan
Joe Bellis
Roger Tucker
Joel Balan
4
|Todd Tiahrt
Re-election
Donald Betts Jr.
|Todd Tiahrt
Steven Rosile
Susan G. Ducey
District 1
  Incumbent Republican Jerry Moran (campaign website) competed against Democrat James Bordonaro (campaign website), Libertarian Jack Warner and Independent Kathleen M. Burton in the General election. Jerry Moran won the election with 82% of the vote. James Bordonaro received 18% of the vote, Kathleen Burton received 3% of the vote, and Jack Warner received 2% of the vote. CQ Politics forecasts the race as 'Safe Republican'.
The party primary elections for District 1 were uncontested.
Race ranking and details from CQ Politics
Kansas District 1 race from OurCampaigns.com
Campaign contributions from OpenSecrets.org
Map of election results from Google Maps
District 2
  Republican nominee Lynn Jenkins (campaign website) won against Democratic incumbent Nancy Boyda (campaign website).2 Libertarian Robert Garrard and Reform Party candidate Leslie Martin also were defeated in the general election. CQ Politics forecasted the race as 'No Clear Favorite'.
Jenkins won over Jim Ryun (campaign website) in the Republican party primary election.
Race ranking and details from CQ Politics
Kansas District 2 race from OurCampaigns.com
Campaign contributions from OpenSecrets.org
Jenkins (R) vs Boyda (D-i) graph of collected poll results from Pollster.com
District 3
  Incumbent Democrat Dennis Moore (campaign website) won against Republican Nick Jordan (campaign website), Libertarian Joe Bellis (campaign website), Independent Roger Tucker (campaign website) and Independent Joel Balam (campaign website) in the general election. CQ Politics forecasted the race as 'Democrat Favored'.
Jordan won over Paul Showen in the Republican party primary election.
Race ranking and details from CQ Politics
Kansas District 3 race from OurCampaigns.com
Campaign contributions from OpenSecrets.org
District 4
  Incumbent Republican Todd Tiahrt (campaign website) won against Democrat Donald Betts Jr. (campaign website), Libertarian Steven Rosile (campaign website) and Reform Party candidate Susan G. Ducey campaign website in the General election. CQ Politics forecasted the race as 'Safe Republican'.
The party primary elections for District 4 were uncontested.
Race ranking and details from CQ Politics
Kansas District 4 race from OurCampaigns.com
Campaign contributions from OpenSecrets.org
References
Candidates for the 2008 Primary (official) Kansas Secretary of State
External links
Elections &amp; Legislative from the Kansas Secretary of State
U.S. Congress candidates for Kansas at Project Vote Smart
Campaign contributions for Kansas congressional races from OpenSecrets.org
Kansas U.S. House of Representatives race from 2008 Race Tracker
Kansas 2008 Category:Kansas elections, 2008
2008 Election Calendar Kansas Secretary of State'↩
↩
