Pink is a pale red color, which takes its name from the flower of the same name.12 According to surveys in Europe and the United States, pink, especially when combined with white or pale blue, is the color most commonly associated with femininity, sensitivity, tenderness, childhood, and the romantic. However, when combined with violet or black, it is associated with eroticism and seduction.3
The use of the word for the color &quot;pink&quot; was first recorded in the late 17th century.4
Varieties and uses
File:Dianthus.jpg|The color pink takes its name from the flowers called pinks, members of the genus Dianthus. File:Rosa Queen Elizabeth1ZIXIETTE.jpg|In most European languages, pink is called rose or rosa, after the rose flower. File:Cherry blossoms in the Tsutsujigaoka Park.jpg|Cherry blossoms in Senai, Miyagi, Japan. The Japanese language has different words for the pink of cherry blossoms (sakura-iro), and peach blossoms (momo-iro). Recently the word pinku has also become popular. File:Greater Flamingoes (Phoenicopterus roseus) in flight W IMG 0081.jpg|Pink is often associated with the exotic. Greater flamingoes in flight over Pocharam Lake in Andhra Pradesh, India. File:Pink 1963 Cadillac.jpg|Pink is sometimes associated with extravagence and a wish to be noticed. A 1963 pink Cadillac. File:Pink gothlolita.jpg|Pink and white together symbolize youth, tenderness and innocence. File:Gentlemen Prefer Blondes Movie Trailer Screenshot (34).jpg|Pink combined with black or violet is associated with seduction. Marilyn Monroe in the trailer for the film Gentlemen Prefer Blondes (1953).
(See also:Shades of pink)
Etymology
The color pink is named after the flowers called pinks, flowering plants in the genus Dianthus. The name derives from the frilled edge of the flowers&lt;U+2014&gt;the verb &quot;to pink&quot; dates from the 14th century and means &quot;to decorate with a perforated or punched pattern&quot; (possibly from German &quot;pinken&quot; = to peck).5 As noted and referenced above, the word &quot;pink&quot; was first used as a noun to refer to the color known today as pink in the 17th century. The verb sense of the word &quot;pink&quot; continues to be used today in the name of the hand tool known as pinking shears.
History, art and fashion
From the ancient world to the Renaissance
The color pink has been described in literature since ancient times; In the Odyssey, written in about 800 BCE, Homer wrote &quot;Then, when the child of morning, rosy-fingered dawn appeared...6 Roman poets also described the color. Roseus is the Latin word meaning &quot;rosy&quot; or &quot;pink.&quot; Lucretius used the word to describe the dawn in his epic poem On the Nature of Things (De rerum natura).7
Pink was not a common color in the fashion of the Middle Ages; nobles usually preferred brighter reds, such as crimson. However, it did appear sometimes in women's fashion, and in religious art. In the 13th and 14th century, in works by Cimabue and Duccio, the Christ child was sometimes portrayed dressed in pink, the color associated with the body of Christ.
In the high Renaissance painting the Madonna of the Pinks by Raphael, the Christ child is presenting a pink flower to the Virgin Mary. The pink was a symbol of marriage, showing a spiritual marriage between the mother and child. 8
During the Renaissance, pink was mostly used for the flesh color of faces and hands. The pigment commonly used for this was called light cinabrese; it was a mixture of the red earth pigment called sinopia, or Venetian red, and a white pigment called Bianco San Genovese, or lime white. In his famous 15th century manual on painting, Il Libro Dell'Arte, Cennino Cennini described it this way: &quot;The color is made of the hansomest and lightest sinoper obtainable, and it is mixed and worked up with lime white; and this white is made from very white and well-purified lime. And when these two colors are well worked up together, that is, two parts cinabrese and the third lime white, make little cakes of it, like halves of nuts, and let them dry. Whenever you need some, take what you think fit; for this color does you credit in painting countenances, hands, and nudes on the wall.&quot; 9
File:East in Libadakia, Serifos, Greece.jpg|The Greek poet Homer wrote of &quot;the child of morning, rose-fingered dawn&quot; in The Odyssey. Sunrise at Serifos, Greece. File:Cimabue, The Virgin and Child Enthroned with Two Angels.jpg| In the early Renaissance, the infant Jesus was sometimes shown dressed in pink, the color associated with the body of Christ. This is the Virgin and Child Enthroned with Two Angels, by Cimabue. (1265&lt;U+2013&gt;1280) File:Duccio di Buoninsegna - Madonna and Child (no. 593) - WGA06706.jpg|In the 1280s, Duccio also painted the Christ child dressed in pink File:Kneeling knight received a swan-crested helmet.jpg|A knight in red receiving a helmet from a damsel in pink, from an English manuscript of The Romance of Alexander (1338-1344). File:Raphael Madonna of the Pinks.jpg|In the painting Madonna of the Pinks by Raphael, the Christ Child gives a pink flower to the Virgin Mary, symbolizing a virtual marriage between the mother and child.
The 18th century
The golden age of the color pink was the Rococo Period (1720&lt;U+2013&gt;1777) in the 18th century, when pastel colors became very fashionable in all the courts of Europe. Pink was particularly championed by Madame de Pompadour (1721&lt;U+2013&gt;1764), the mistress of King Louis XV of France. who wore combinations of pale blue and pink, and had a particular tint of pink made for her by the Sevres porcelain factory, created by adding nuances of blue, black and yellow.10
While pink was quite evidently the color of seduction in the portraits made of by George Romney of Emma, Lady Hamilton, the future mistress of Admiral Horatio Nelson, in the late 18th century, it had the completely opposite meaning in the portrait of Sarah Barrett Moulton painted by Thomas Lawrence in 1794. In this painting, it symbolized childhood, innocence and tenderness. Sarah Moulton was just eleven years old when the picture was painted, and died tragically the following year.
File:Pompadour6.jpg|Madame de Pompadour, the mistress of Louis XV of France, made pink and blue the leading fashion colors in the Court of Versailles. She had a special pink tint created for her by the Sevres porcelain factory. This portrait by Maurice Quentin de la Tour was painted between 1748 and 1755. File:Galerie des Modes 3.jpg|Pink had became a popular color throughout Europe by the late 18th century. It was associated with both romanticism and seduction. This fashion plate is from 1778&lt;U+2013&gt;1787. File:George Romney - Lady Hamilton (as a Bacchante) 3.jpg|Emma, Lady Hamilton, later the mistress of Admiral Horatio Nelson, had herself painted by English painter George Romney posing as a Bacchante, dressed in pink. (1782&lt;U+2013&gt;1784) File:Pinkie detailed.jpg|The portrait of Sarah Moulton, popularly known as &quot;Pinkie&quot;, by Sir Thomas Lawrence (1794). Here pink represented youth, innocence and tenderness.
The 19th century
In 19th century England, pink ribbons or decorations were often wore by small boys; boys were simply considered small men, and while men in England wore red uniforms, boys wore pink. In fact the clothing for children in the 19th century was almost always white, since, before the invention of chemical dyes, clothing of any color would quickly fade when washed in boiling water. Queen Victoria was painted in 1850 with her seventh child and third son, Prince Arthur, who wore white and pink.
File:Queen Victoria with Prince Arthur.jpg|Queen Victoria in 1850 or 1851 with her third son and seventh child, Prince Arthur. In the 19th century, baby boys often wore white and pink. seen as a masculine color, while girls often wore white and blue. File:American School, Young Boy with Whip, ca. 1840.jpg|Young boy in pink, American school of painting (about 1840). Both girls and boys wore pink in the 19th century. Claude_Monet_-_Springtime_-_Walters_3711.jpg|The Impressionist painter Claude Monet used pink, blue and green to capture the effects of light and shadows on a white dress in Springtime.(1872).
The 20th century
In the 20th century, pinks became bolder, brighter and more assertive, in part because of the invention of chemical dyes which did not fade. The pioneer in the creation of the new wave of pinks was the Italian designer Elsa Schiaparelli, (1890-1973) who was aligned with the artists of the surrealist movement, including Jean Cocteau. In 1931 she created a new variety of the color, called Shocking pink, made by mixing magenta with a small amount of white. She also created a scandal by launching a perfume of the same name, sold in a bottle in the shale of a woman's bust. Her fashions, co-designed with artists such as Cocteau, featured the new pinks.11
In Nazi Germany in the 1930s and 1940s, inmates of concentration camps who were accused of homosexuality were forced to wear a pink triangle.12 Because of this, the pink triangle has become a symbol of the modern gay rights movement.
In 1973, Sheila Levrant de Bretteville created &quot;Pink,&quot; a broadside meant to explore the notions of gender as associated with the color pink, for an American Institute of Graphic Arts exhibition about color. This was the only entry about the color pink. Various women including many in the Feminist Studio Workshop at the Woman's Building submitted entries exploring their association with the color. De Bretteville arranged the squares of paper to form a &quot;quilt&quot; from which posters were printed and disseminated throughout Los Angeles.13 She was often called &quot;Pinky&quot; as a result.
In 1993, artist Gioia Fonda created a conceptual piece in the form of a week long holiday called pink week. The intention of pink week is to liberate the color pink from all dogma and simply celebrate the color pink as a color.14
Bubblegum Pink is an installation by the artist duo Bigert &amp; Bergstrom which &quot;confronted [the viewer] with three different mental climates&quot; 15 involving large amounts of pink. This mirrors the use of the color in American prisons to calm aggressive prisoners. It features a pink cell and a carpet worn by repetitive pacing.16
Christo and Jeanne-Claude's Surrounded Islands wrapped wooded islands in Miami's Biscayne Bay with  of bright pink fabric.17 Thomas von Taschitzki has said that &quot;the monochrome pink wrappings&quot;...&quot;form a counterpoint to the small green wooded islands.&quot; 18
Many of Franz West's aluminium sculptures were often painted a bright pink, for example Sexualitatssymbol (Symbol of Sexuality). West has said that the pink was intended as an &quot;outcry to nature&quot;.19
File:Shocking Pink Schiaparelli.jpg|Shocking pink was a new and more assertive pink invented by Italian fashion designer Elsa Schiaparelli in 1931, by mixing a little white with magenta. It became her signature color.
File:Dinner in Honor of Andre Malraux.jpg|Jacqueline Kennedy, the wife of President John F. Kennedy, made pink a popular high-fashion color. Here she is in 1962 with French Minister of Culture Andre Malraux at the unveiling of the Mona Lisa on its first visit to America. File:DebrettevillePink.jpg|Detail of pink poster
Science and nature
Optics
In optics, pink can refer to any of the colors between bluish red (purple) and red, of medium to high brightness and of low to moderate saturation.20 Although pink is generally considered a tint of red,2122 most variations of pink lie between red, white and magenta colors. This means that the pink's hue is between red and magenta.23242526
Geology
File:Topaz-170679.jpg|Pink topaz from Ouro Preto, Brazil. File:Corundum-215337.jpg|Corundum, or pink sapphire, from the Dodoma Region of Tanzania File:Calcite-163756.jpg|Calcite from Bou Azzer, Morocco File:Barite-Rhodochrosite-tcm01a.jpg|Barite-Rhodochrosite from the Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region in China. File:Clinochlore-tuc1030y.jpg|Clinochlore from Erzerum Province, Turkey File:Coral Pink Sand Dunes State Park.jpg|The dunes in Coral Pink Sand Dunes State Park in Utah are made of fine grains of Navajo sandstone. The pink color comes from grains of reddish hematite mixed with white quartz. Angel's Landing - Zion National Park.jpg|Angel's Landing in Zion National Park in Utah is made of pink sandstone. File:Isla Great Santa Cruz49.JPG|A pink sand beach on Great Santa Cruz Island in the Philippine Islands.
Biology
File:Strigilla carnaria.jpg|A Strigilla carnaria shell from Dominica, in the West Indies.
File:Frogfish ocellated.jpg|An Ocelated frogfish (Antennarius ocellatus, from East Timor. The frogfish is camoulflaged to look like a rock covered with algae or seaweed; it lies motionless and waits for its prey to come to it.
File:Iggy pink.jpg| The pink iguana of the Galapagos Islands was first identified in 1986 and first recognized as a distinct species in 2009.
File:Inia geoffrensis head.jpg|The Pink Dolphin is a freshwater river dolphin which lives in the Orinoco, Amazon and Araguaia/Tocantins River systems of Brazil, Bolivia, Peru, Ecuador, Colombia and Venezuela. It is an endangered species and has a brain 40% larger than a human's.
File:2012-kruger-albino-elephant.jpg|The so-called &quot;white elephant&quot; is revered in several countries in Southeast Asia and is naturally pinkish gray. They are actually albino elephants.
File:Sow with piglet.jpg|The pig has been domesticated over ten thousand years and selectively bred to have a pink skin, without melanin, which farmers traditionally have preferred to a dark color.27
File:Flamingos Laguna Colorada.jpg|Flamingoes in Laguna Colorada, Bolivia. The pink or reddish color of flamingos comes from carotenoid proteins in their diet of animal and plant plankton. A unhealthy or malnourished flamingo, or one kept in captivity and not fed sufficient carotene, is usually pale or white.
Why cooked beef, cured ham and steamed shrimp are pink
Raw beef is red, because the muscles of vertebrate animals, such as cows and pigs, contain a protein called myoglobin, which binds oxygen and iron atoms. When beef is cooked, the myoglobin proteins undergo oxidation, and gradually turn from red to pink to brown; that is, from rare to medium to well-done. Pork contains less myoglobin than beef and therefore is less red; when heated it changes from pinkish-red to less pink to tan or white.
Ham, though it contains myoglobins like beef, undergoes a different transformation. Traditional hams, such as prosciutto, are made by taking the hind leg or thigh of a pig, covering it with sea salt, which removes the moisture content, and then letting it dry or cure for as long as two years. The salt (sodium nitrate) permits the ham to retain its original pink color, even when dried out. Supermarket hams are made by a different and faster process; they are brined, or infused with a salt-water solution, containing sodium nitrite, which transfers nitric oxide, which bonds with the myoglobin to form the traditional pink cured ham color.
File:Rostas (ready and served).JPG|Roast beef gets its distinctive pink color from myoglobin, which gradually turns from red to pink to brown (rare to medium to well-done) when heated. File:Prosciutto.jpg|Prosciutto hams also get their pink color from salt combined with the natural protein called myoglobin. File:NCI steamed shrimp.jpg|The shells and flesh of steamed shrimp contain a natural carotenoid pigment which turns pink when heated. The same process turns cooked lobster and crab from blue-green to red when they are boiled.
Plants and flowers
Pink is one of the most common colors of flowers; it serves to attract the insects and birds necessary for pollination and perhaps also to deter predators. The color comes from natural pigments called anthocyanins, which also provide the pink in raspberries.
Pink_Rose_In_The_Rain_(216504571).jpg|A pink rose in the rain. Clematite_chantily_01.JPG|A clematis Chantilly. Flickr_-_brewbooks_-_Pink_Hibiscus_-_Brisbane_(1).jpg|A pink hibiscus from Australia. Tulip cv. 26.JPG|Pink tulips in the botanical gardens of Moscow State University. Dahlia_-_%22Gilt_Edge%22_cultivar.jpg|A pink dahlia Gemeine_Pfingstrose.JPG|A pink peony. Magnolia 'Susan' 03.JPG|A flower of a magnolia tree Rhododendron_catawbiense_01.JPG|A pink rhododendron Spiraea_japonica_Alpina3.jpg|spiraea japonica flowers. Cerisier_du_Japon_Prunus_serrulata.jpg|A Japanese cherry tree (prunus serrulata in bloom. Hyazinthen.JPG|Pink hyacinth flowers Phlox paniculata.jpg|Phlox paniculata
Pigments - Pinke
In the 17th century, the word pink or pinke was also used to describe a yellowish pigment, which was mixed with blue colors to yield greenish colors. Thomas Jenner's A Book of Drawing, Limning, Washing (1652) categorizes &quot;Pink &amp; blew bice&quot; amongst the greens (p.  38),28 and specifies several admixtures of greenish colors made with pink&lt;U+2014&gt;e.g. &quot;Grasse-green is made of Pink and Bice, it is shadowed with Indigo and Pink &lt;U+2026&gt; French-green of Pink and Indico [shadowed with] Indico&quot; (pp. 38&lt;U+2013&gt;40). In William Salmon's Polygraphice (1673), &quot;Pink yellow&quot; is mentioned amongst the chief yellow pigments (p. 96), and the reader is instructed to mix it with either Saffron or Ceruse for &quot;sad&quot; or &quot;light&quot; shades thereof, respectively.
Sonics
Pink noise (), also known as 1/f noise, in audio engineering is a signal or process with a frequency spectrum such that the power spectral density is proportional to the reciprocal of the frequency.
Pink in symbolism and world culture
Pink in other languages
In most European languages, the color pink as the name of the rose flower; rose in French and Dutch; rosa in German, Portuguese, Spanish and Italian; rozoviy in Russian; and rozowy in Polish. In Finnish it is called pinkki.
In the Japanese language, the traditional word for pink, '', takes its name from the peach blossom. There is a separate word for the color of the cherry blossom: sakura-iro. In recent times a word based on the American version, , has begun to be used.
Idioms and expressions
In the pink. To be in top form, in good health, in good condition. In Romeo and Juliet, Mercutio says; &quot;I am the very pink of courtesy.&quot; Romeo: Pink for flower? Mercutio: Right. Romeo: Then my pump is well flowered.&quot;.29
To see pink elephants means to hallucinate from alcoholism. The expression was used by American novelist Jack London in his book John Barleycorn in 1913.
Pink slip. To be given a pink slip means to be fired or dismissed from a job. It was first recorded in 1915 in the United States.
The phrase &quot;pink-collar worker&quot; refers to persons working in jobs conventionally regarded as &quot;women's work.&quot;
Pink Money, the pink pound or pink dollar is an economic term which refers to the spending power of the LGBT community.30 Advertising agencies sometimes call the gay market the pink economy.
Tickled pink means extremely pleased.
Architecture
Early pink buildings are usually built of brick or sandstone, which takes its pale red color from hematite, or iron ore. In the 18th century, the golden age of pink and other pastel colors, pink mansions and churches, were built all across Europe. More modern pink buildings usually take that color to appear exotic or to attract attention.
Castillo de Malbork, Polonia, 2013-05-19, DD 04.jpg|Malbork Castle in Poland, built by the Teutonic Knights in 1440, is the largest brick structure in the world. Agra Fort 2.jpg|The Agra Fort, also known as the Red Fort, in Agra, Pradesh, India was built between 1558 and 1574 by the Mughal emperor Akbar.. Casa Rosada Buenos Aires.jpg|Casa Rosada, or the &quot;Pink House&quot;, in Buenos Aires, built between 1713 and 1855 as a fort and then customs house, is the official residence and office of the President of Argentina. Mughal emperor Akbar. The structure is built of pink sandstone on the outside over an earlier core of brick. File:&lt;U+0423&gt;&lt;U+0441&gt;&lt;U+0430&gt;&lt;U+0434&gt;&lt;U+044C&gt;&lt;U+0431&gt;&lt;U+0430&gt; &lt;U+041E&gt;&lt;U+0441&gt;&lt;U+0442&gt;&lt;U+0430&gt;&lt;U+043D&gt;&lt;U+043A&gt;&lt;U+0438&gt;&lt;U+043D&gt;&lt;U+043E&gt;.jpg|Ostankino Palace, outside of Moscow, is an 18th century country house built by Pyotr Sheremetev, then the richest man in Russia. File:Macau Government Headquarters 01.JPG|Macau Government Headquarters (1849), an example of Portuguese colonial architecture and the Pombaline style in Macau. Royal Hawaiian.jpg|The Royal Hawaiian hotel in Honolulu, Hawaii , built in 1927, was the first hotel on Waikiki Beach. Its pink color was designed to match an exotic setting, and to contrast with the blue of the sea and green of the landscape. File:Interesting Building Angle of Georgia-Pacific Tower Atlanta.jpg|The Georgia-Pacific Tower in Atlanta, Georgia (1981), a modernist pink skyscraper. File:Canada Place Building Edmonton.jpg|Canada Place Building, in Edmonton, Alberta, Canada (2004) a post-modernist style government office building.
Gender
In Europe and the United States, pink is often associated with girls, while blue is associated with boys. This distinction is relatively recent, usually dated to early in the 20th century.31 Before the 20th century, European countries varied, with some assigning colors based on the baby's complexion, and others assigning pink sometimes to boys and sometimes to girls.32
By the 1950s, pink was strongly associated with femininity&quot; but to an extent that was &quot;neither rigid nor universal&quot; as it later became.33
34 or 1920s.35 Many have noted the contrary association of pink with boys in 20th-century America. An article in the trade publication Earnshaw's Infants' Department in June 1918 said: 36373839 
One study by two neuroscientists in Current Biology examined color preferences across cultures and found significant differences between male and female responses. Both groups favored blues over other hues, but women had more favorable responses to the reddish-purple range of the spectrum and men had more favorable responses to the greenish-yellow end of the spectrum. Despite the fact that the study used adults, and both groups preferred blues, and responses to the color pink were never even tested, the popular press represented the research as an indication of an innate preference by girls for pink. The misreading has been often repeated in market research, reinforcing American culture's association of pink with girls on the basis of imagined innate characteristics.40
File:Infante by Carnicero.jpg|The son of the King of Spain (1798-1802). In the 18th and 19th century, pink was worn by both girls and boys.
Sexuality
As noted above, pink combined with black or violet is commonly associated with eroticism and seduction.
In street slang, the pink sometimes refers to the vagina.41
In Russian, pink (&lt;U+0440&gt;&lt;U+043E&gt;&lt;U+0437&gt;&lt;U+043E&gt;&lt;U+0432&gt;&lt;U+044B&gt;&lt;U+0439&gt;, rozovyj) is used to refer to lesbians, and light blue (&lt;U+0433&gt;&lt;U+043E&gt;&lt;U+043B&gt;&lt;U+0443&gt;&lt;U+0431&gt;&lt;U+043E&gt;&lt;U+0439&gt;, goluboj) refers to gay men.42
In Japan, a genre of low budget, erotic cinema is referred to as .43
Social movements
Pink is often used as a symbolic color by groups involved in issues important to women, and the lesbian, gay, bisexual and transexual community.
A Dutch newsgroup about homosexuality is called nl.roze (roze being the Dutch word for pink), while in Britain, Pink News is a gay newspaper and online news service. There is a magazine called Pink for the lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender (LGBT) community which has different editions for various metropolitan areas.44 In France Pink TV is an LGBT cable channel.
In Ireland, Support group for Irish Pink Adoptions defines a pink family as a relatively neutral umbrella term for the single gay men, single lesbians, or same-gender couples who intend to adopt, are in the process of adopting, or have adopted. It also covers adults born/raised in such families. The group welcome the input of other people touched by adoption, especially people who were adopted as children and are now adults.
Pinkstinks, a campaign founded in London in May 200845 to raise awareness of what they claim is the damage caused by gender stereotyping of children.4647
The Pink Pistols is a gay gun rights organization.48
The pink ribbon is the international symbol of breast cancer awareness. Pink was chosen partially because it is so strongly associated with femininity.49
File:Pink ribbon.svg|The pink ribbon has been a symbol of breast cancer awareness since 1991. The color was chosen because of its close association with femininity.
Academic dress
In the French academic dress system, the five traditional fields of study (Arts, Science, Medicine, Law and Divinity) are each symbolized by a distinctive color, which appears in the academic dress of the people who graduated in this field. Redcurrant, an extremely red shade of pink, is the distinctive color for Medicine (and other health-related fields) :fr:Groseille (couleur).
Calendars
In Thailand, pink is associated with Tuesday on the Thai solar calendar. Anyone may wear pink on Tuesdays, and anyone born on a Tuesday may adopt pink as their color.
The press
Pink is used for the newsprint paper of several important newspapers devoted to business and sports, and the color is also connected with the press aimed at the gay community.
Since 1893 the London Financial Times newspaper has used a distinctive salmon pink color for its newsprint, originally because pink dyed paper was less expensive than bleached white paper.50 Today the color is used to distinguish the newspaper from competitors on a press kiosk or news stand. In some countries, the salmon press identifies economic newspapers or economics sections in &quot;white&quot; newspapers. Some sports newspapers, such as La Gazzetta dello Sport in Italy, also use pink paper to stand out from other newspapers. It awards a pink jersey to the winner of Italy's most important bicycle race, the Giro d'Italia. (See #Sports).
File:FT's 125th Anniversary Issue.jpg|The Financial Times of London is printed on salmon pink paper, which makes it stand out from other newspapers on news stands and press kiosks. File:Pink News Screenshot 15th April 2012.png|The Pink News is a newspaper for the Gay community in Britain. File:20090715 gasport frontpage.jpg|The Italian sports newspaper La Gazzetta dello Sport also is printed on pink newspaper, and provides the pink jersey for the leader in Italy's top bicycle race, the Giro d'Italia.
Food and beverages
According to surveys in Europe and the United States, pink is the color most associated with sweet foods and beverages. Pink is also one of the few colors to be strongly associated with a particular aroma, that of roses.51
File:Choco pink.jpg|Pink is the color most commonly associated with sweet tastes.
Law
In England and Wales, a brief delivered to a barrister by a solicitor is usually tied with pink ribbon. Pink was traditionally the color associated with the defense, while white ribbons may have been used for the prosecution52
Literature
In Spanish and Italian, a &quot;pink novel&quot; (novela rosa in Spanish, romanzo rosa in Italian) is a sentimental novel marketed to women.
In Nathaniel Hawthorne's Young Goodman Brown, Faith is wearing a pink ribbon in her hair which represents her innocence.53
Carl Surely's short story &quot;Dinsdale's Pink&quot; is a coming of age tale of a young man growing up in Berlin in the 1930s, dealing with issues of gender, sexuality and politics.
Politics
Pink, being a 'watered-down' red, is sometimes used in a derogatory way to describe a person with mild communist or socialist beliefs (see Pinko).
In maps of political parties, pink is used in Portugal to represent areas which vote for the Socialist Party, and in France to show areas won by the French Socialist Party.
The term pink revolution is sometimes used to refer to the overthrow of President Askar Akayev and his government in the Central Asian republic of Kyrgyzstan after the parliamentary elections of February 27 and of March 13, 2005, although it is more commonly called the tulip revolution.
The Swedish feminist party Feminist Initiative uses pink as their color.
Code Pink is an American women's anti-globalization and anti-war group founded in 2002 by activist Medea Benjamin. The group has disrupted Congressional hearings and heckled President Obama at his public speeches.
Code Pink July 4.jpg| Code Pink is an American women's activist group opposing war and globalization.
Religion
In the Yogic Hindu, Shaktic Hindu and Tantric Buddhist traditions rose is one of the colors of the fourth primary energy center, the heart chakra Anahata. The other color is green.
In Catholicism, pink (called rose by the Catholic Church) symbolizes joy and happiness. It is used for the Third Sunday of Advent and the Fourth Sunday of Lent (see Laetare Sunday) to mark the halfway point in these seasons of penance. For this reason, one of the candles in an Advent wreath may be pink, rather than purple.
Pink is the color most associated with Indian spiritual leader Meher Baba, who often wore pink coats to please his closest female follower, Mehera Irani, and today pink remains an important color, symbolizing love, to Baba's followers.
Sports
File:Ryder Hesjedal celebrating 2012 giro.jpg|The leader in the Giro d'Italia cycle race wears a pink jersey (maglia rosa); this reflects the distinctive pink-colored newsprint of the sponsoring Italian La Gazzetta dello Sport newspaper. This is Rydar Hesjedal winner, of the 2012 race.
Toys
Toys aimed at girls often display pink prominently on packaging and the toy themselves. This caused concern among some fans of My Little Pony: Friendship Is Magic when Princess Celestia, white-coated in the show itself, had a toy released with her colored pink instead.
In its 1957 catalog, Lionel Trains offered for sale a pink model freight train for girls. The steam locomotive and coal car were pink and the freight cars of the freight train were various pastel colors. The caboose was baby blue. It was a marketing failure because any girl who was enough a tomboy to want a model train would want a real train and not a pink train, and boys in the 1950s did not want to be seen playing with a pink train. However, today it is a valuable collector's item.54
Others
Jaipur, the capital city of the Indian state of Rajasthan, is known as the Pink City of India. In 1863, the city was colored pink to welcome Prince Albert, the consort of Queen Victoria.55 The practice is still followed within the walled city to reinforce the image of the city as a centre for heritage tourism.
See also
Fuchsia (color)
List of colors
Pinkstinks
Ros&lt;U+00E9&gt;, a wine whose color is neither red nor white
Variations of pink
References
Bibliography
Notes and citations
External links
Support group for Irish Pink Adoptions
Shorter Oxford English Dictionary, 5th Edition, Oxford University Press.↩
Webster New World Dictionary, Third College Edition: &quot;Any of a genus (Dianthus) of annual and perennial plants of the pink family with white, pink or red flowers.; its pale red color.&quot;↩
Eva Heller, Psychologie de la couleur &lt;U+2013&gt; effets et symboliques, pp. 179-184↩
&quot;pink, n.&lt;U+2075&gt; and adj.&lt;U+00B2&gt;&quot;, Oxford English Dictionary Online↩
Collins Dictionary↩
The Odyssey, Book XII, translated by Samuel Butler.↩
↩
http://www.nationalgallery.org.uk/cgi-bin/WebObjects.dll/CollectionPublisher.woa/wa/work?workNumber=NG6596 The Madonna of the Pinks on the official National Gallery website↩
Cennino Cennini, The Craftsman's Handbook - Il Libro dell'Arte, pg. 23-24.↩
Eva Heller, Psychologie de la couleur, effets et symboliques, pp. 182-83↩
Eva Heller, Psychologie de la couleur - effets et symboliques, p. 184.↩
The Pink Triangle: The Nazi War Against Homosexuals (1986) by Richard Plant (New Republic Books). ISBN 0-8050-0600-1.↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
Colors by Hue at MSDN↩
↩
↩
↩
1 New Scientist, &quot;Colorful pigs evolved trhough farming, not nature&quot;.↩
↩
Romeo and Juliet, Act 2, Scene 4↩
↩
Jo B. Paoletti, Pink and Blue: Telling the Girls From the Boys in America (Indiana University Press, 2012), 87↩
↩
Paoletti, 92↩
↩
↩
Smithsonian.com: Jeanne Maglaty, &quot;When Did Girls Start Wearing Pink?,&quot; April 8, 2011, accessed June 4, 2011↩
Merkin, Daphne. &quot;Gender Trouble&quot;, The New York Times Style Magazine, March 12, 2006. Retrieved 10 December 2007.↩
Orenstein, Peggy. &quot;What's Wrong With Cinderella?&quot;, The New York Times Magazine, December 24, 2006, retrieved December 10, 2007. Orenstein writes: &quot;When colors were first introduced to the nursery in the early part of the 20th century, pink was considered the more masculine hue, a pastel version of red. Blue, with its intimations of the Virgin Mary, constancy and faithfulness, was thought to be dainty. Why or when that switched is not clear, but as late as the 1930s a significant percentage of adults in one national survey held to that split.&quot;↩
↩
Paoletti, 97-8↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
Cited by Stephen Fidler of the Wall Street Journal, formerly a correspondent for the Financial Times.↩
Eva Heller, Psychologie de la couleur &lt;U+2013&gt; effets et symboliques↩
http://www.independent.co.uk/life-style/the-evidence-the-barristers-desk-1175803.html↩
As he moves out of the darkness, a pink ribbon blows down next to him and he sees that Faith is part of the &quot;communion&quot; that is taking place in the woods.↩
↩
Why are all buildings in Jaipur pink in colour?↩
