First Fruits are a religious offering of the first agricultural produce of the harvest. In classical Greek, Roman, Hebrew and Christian religions, the first fruits were offered to the temple or church. First Fruits were often a primary source of income to maintain the religious leaders and the facility.
In Ancient Greece
In Classical Athens the First Fruits were called an offering of aparche. Except during times of war, this would be a major source of funds for the temples of the Eleusinian goddesses, Demeter and Kore (pronounced kore-eh). Much of the agricultural offering was sold by the temple with the proceeds to pay for the daily upkeep of the temple complex. Under Pericles' rule, it became a way of extending Athens' power. The Demos or voting citizens would control the operation of the temple by elected boards. During times of war or for other needs the Demos would borrow money from the treasury of the temple. Neighboring cities under Athens' control were required to give offerings from their harvests. This served to enrich Athens and extend her power.
Much of this was shown in the temple reports which were carved in stone when the governing body (called the epistatai) of the temple changed hands. In the stone IG I3 386-387 it can been seen how the finances of the Eleusinian temples worked. Doctor Maureen B. Cavanaugh who translated stone IG I3 386-387, argues that there were heavy implications of the funding realized from the First Fruits donations to the temple, in particular that it brought significant impact on Athenian power.1 This is noted in a loan sited in the stone record, of over 20,000 silver drachmas to the city. The Eleusinian temple complex was more than just a temple to Demeter; there were living quarters, storage, work shops, administration as well as public spaces. It was almost like a city within a city.
In Ancient Rome
In the Roman religion the first fruits offering was observed in the Roman home. This was done during daily meals as well as more formal religious times of the month.
Biblical
In Ancient Israel
In the Ancient Israel, First Fruits were tithed as Heave Offerings; the tithe was allocated throughout the year, but for accounting purposes traditionally began each year at Tu Bishvat, which was thus the occasion of a festival. In later times2 this tithe was limited to the traditional seven agricultural products (Wheat, Barley, Grapes in the form of Wine, Figs, Pomegranates, Olives in the form of Oil, and Dates) grown in Palestine, but eventually onions, cucumbers, melons, a traditional cheese (known as tiltan), the herb fenugreek, and certain other vegetables were permitted as well.3 This tithe, and the associated harvest festival, is legislated by the Torah,4 though textual scholars believe that these regulations were imposed long after the offerings and festival had developed.5
By the time of classical antiquity more extensive regulations had developed, and were subsequently recorded in the Classical Rabbinical Literature.6 According to the these, the corners of fields, wild areas, left overs after harvesting (gleanings), and unowned crops were not subjected to (and could not be used as) the tithe of First Fruits (they were intended to be left as charity for the poor, and other mendicants);7 plants from outside Palestine were also prohibited from inclusion in the tithe,8 as was anything belonging to non-Jews.9 The rules also specify that that each type of product had to be individually tithed, even if the numbers were balanced so that there was no difference in amount between this situation and using just some types of First Fruit as the tithe, and retaining others in their entirety.10 Fruit which was allocated to the tithe could not be swapped for fruit which wasn't, to the extent that wine couldn't be swapped for vinegar, and olive oil couldn't be replaced by olives; furthermore, Fruits were not allowed to be individually divided if only part went to the tithe (small whole onions had to be used rather than fractions of large onions, for example).11
The separation of tithed produce from untithed produce was also subject to regulatation. The individual(s) separating one from the other had to be ritually clean, and had to include the best produce in the tithe if a priest lived nearby.12 During the act of separation, the produce was not permitted to be counted out to determine which fell under the tithe, nor to be weighed for that purpose, nor to be measured for the same reason, but instead the proportion that was to become the tithe had to be guessed at.13 In certain situations, such as when tithed produce became mixed with non-tithed produce (or there was uncertainty as to whether it had), the tithed produce had to be destroyed.14 Anyone who made mistakes in the separation of tithed produce, and anyone who consumed any of the tithe, was required to pay compensation as a guilt offering.15
Christian perspectives
Although some Christian churches do celebrate harvest time, the idea of giving the First Fruits to the church has been otherwise abandoned by Christianity. In the Canonical Gospels, the concept of the harvest of First Fruits is used metaphorically and allegorically. In the Gospel of Matthew, Jesus is described as stating that in the time of harvest he would instruct the harvesters to gather the tares, bind them into bundles, and burn them, but to gather the wheat in [his] barn. Some Christian pundits argue that this is more about saving man than offering any thanksgiving to a deity, the tares being sinners and the wheat being the chosen or good people, though other Christian pundits, as well as early gnostic writers argued it was less about sin and more about following his teachings and abandoning the teachings they had formerly known. In the Gospel of John, Jesus is described as stating ... he that reapeth receiveth wages, and gathereth fruit unto life eternal: that both he that soweth and he that reapeth may rejoice together,16 which some Christian pundits argue is about rewards from God for those who perform God&lt;U+2019&gt;s work.
Tithe literally means a tenth. First Fruits means to appropriatley mark as a male. Which according to God's word the first male born of each womb belongs to the Lord. This is completely different from tithing.
In the Roman Catholic Church
In the Middle Ages the concept of offering the first fruits was adapted by the Christian church. This was called a tithe and was basically a tax to support the local clergy and the facility. In England, every tenth egg, sheaf of wheat, lamb, chicken, and all other animals were given to the church as a tithe, so farm products were expected to be donated throughout the year.
In France, the tithes&lt;U+2014&gt;called &quot;la d&lt;U+00EE&gt;me&quot;&lt;U+2014&gt;were a land and agricultural tax. The offering of first fruits was also referred to as new fruits. In French churches in the Middle Ages, new fruits were at given seasons presented at Mass for blessing. The blessed fruits were kept by the church and divided between the clergy and the poor. Similar customs during the Middle Ages could be found in all European countries.
First Fruits also refers to the payment new clerics made to the bishop or the Pope of all profits from the territory the new cleric controlled. This payment was called both Annates and First Fruits.
Citations and Notes
Further reading
http://www.christiananswers.net/dictionary/harvest.html
Bible, Exodus 23:16,19, Lev. 23:9-14, Matthew 13:30, John 4:36, Deuteronomy 26:2.
he:&lt;U+05D1&gt;&lt;U+05D9&gt;&lt;U+05DB&gt;&lt;U+05D5&gt;&lt;U+05E8&gt;&lt;U+05D9&gt;&lt;U+05DD&gt;
Category:Religious philosophy and doctrine Category:Jewish sacrificial law
Maureen B. Cavanaugh [PhD],''Eleusis and Athens - Documents in Finance, Religion and Politics in the Fifth Century B.C. '', Scholars Press, Published 1996, ISBN 0-7885-0031-7.↩
Peake's commentary on the Bible↩
Jewish Encyclopedia, Heave offerings↩
Exodus 23:16; Deuteronomy 26:2; Exodus 23:19; Leviticus 23:9; et al.↩
Richard Elliott Friedman, Who wrote the Bible?↩
Jewish Encyclopedia, Sacrifice↩
John 4:36↩
