George Went Hensley (c. 1880 &lt;U+2013&gt; July 25, 1955) was an American Pentecostal minister best known for popularizing the practice of snake handling. A native of rural Appalachia, he experienced a dramatic religious conversion around 1910 and came to believe that the New Testament commanded all Christians to handle poisonous snakes.
Hensley traveled throughout the Southeastern United States, teaching a form of Pentecostalism that emphasized strict personal holiness and frequent contact with poisonous snakes. Although illiterate, he became a licensed minister with the Tennessee Church of God in 1915. For the next several years, he went from place to place in Tennessee and conducted Church of God-sanctioned services. He resigned from ministry in 1922, after separating from his wife due to his drunkenness and failure to earn a consistent income. Soon afterwards, he was arrested on moonshine-related charges and sentenced to a term in a workhouse. Rather than serve his entire term, he escaped from custody and fled the state.
After evading Tennessee authorities, Hensley traveled to Ohio, where he held revival services and remarried. Hensley and his family moved frequently through the Southeast, spending time in Tennessee, Kentucky, Ohio, Indiana, Georgia, Florida and Virginia. He rarely stayed long in one location, due to legal troubles, family conflicts, and a general desire to move. Although Hensley spoke at many services, he seldom earned enough money to support his family, which caused tension in his marriage. His second wife left him after 16 years of marriage, and he became estranged from most of his family.
He continued to minister, however, and established churches, known as the Church of God with Signs Following, in Tennessee and Kentucky. His services ranged from small meetings held in houses to large gatherings that drew media attention and hundreds of attendees. On at least two occasions he was arrested for violating bans on snake handling. He moved to Chattanooga and briefly married again in the late 1940s, but was divorced after less than a year. His next marriage was more successful, possibly because his fourth wife traveled with him on his many ministry trips throughout the Southeast. By the end of his career, Hensley claimed to have been bitten by snakes over 400 times without ill effect. Family members, however, recall instances where he was close to death after services. In 1955, while conducting a service in Florida, he was bitten by a snake and became violently ill. He refused to seek medical attention and died the next day.
Although Pentecostal snake handling has independently developed in several ministries, Hensley is generally credited with spreading the practice throughout the Southeast. His frequent travels and media exposure significantly raised public awareness of the practice, but the effectiveness of his ministry was hindered by the excesses of his personal life, the deaths of his followers, and the proscription of snake handling by other denominations. He was, however, able to convince many residents of rural Appalachia that snake handling was commanded by God, and his followers continued the practice after his death.
Early life
According to the account which Hensley related to his children, he was originally from West Virginia and his family's roots were in Pennsylvania. It has been established, however, that Hensley's family lived in Hawkins County, Tennessee, in 18801 and historian David Kimbrough argues that Hensley was born in Eastern Tennessee in 1880.2 One of 13 children,3 his family moved to Ooltewah, Tennessee while he was a child. By the time he was ten years old, they had moved to Loudon County, Tennessee.4 Hensley also lived in Big Stone Gap, Virginia as a child, and there he witnessed an elderly woman handle a snake during a revival service at a coal mining camp.5 His mother and sisters were very religious,6 and he was raised as a Baptist but he left the Baptist church in 1901.7
In 1901, Hensley married Amanda Winniger and the couple moved to her brother's  farm in Ooltewah, where they lived together in a shack.8 There he found work in local ore mines, helped his brother-in-law with his lumber business, and participated in the production of moonshine (illegal spirits then common in that region). By 1919, Hensley's mother was living on the same farm, having separated from his father.9 Hensley likely encountered a Holiness Pentecostal Church of God service, where he was exposed to a different type of theology, for the first time while in the area. After attending a service where the teenage son of an evangelist spoke, Hensley had a conversion experience and dramatically changed his lifestyle, forsaking alcohol and tobacco.10
Church of God, snake handling, and marriages
Hensley was initially content after his born again experience at the Church of God11 but began to wonder whether he was living a sufficiently righteous life. He pondered the relevance of a verse in the Gospel of Mark that referred to Christians handling poisonous snakes. Psychologists Ralph W. Hood and W. Paul Williamson12 as well as one of Hensley's children have suggested that a childhood memory of witnessing snake handling in Virginia drew his attention to this verse.13 Hensley later claimed that the he began to doubt his salvation and went to a nearby hill to pray and seek God's will.14 In a 1947 newspaper interview, he claimed to have seen a snake while he was walking on the hill, knelt in prayer, and took hold of the snake.15 Hensley brought the snake to his church and instructed the congregation to prove their salvation by holding the snake.16
The date of Hensley's first experience with snake handling is unknown,17 but took place between 1908 and 1914.18 Hensley began to host snake handling services in rural parts of Tennessee.19 His supporters later asserted that a large revival broke out in the area at this time, a claim which is considered dubious by historians.20 After he began to practice snake handling, the Church of God allowed him to continue without objection21 and in 1914, Hensley held a snake handling meeting with a Church of God bishop in Cleveland, Tennessee.22 In 1915, Hensley applied to be licensed as a minister by the Church of God,23 though, as he was illiterate, the assistance of his wife was needed to complete the required paperwork.24 After being licensed by the Church of God, Hensley held services with the Church of God throughout Tennessee25 and held revival services at church general assemblies.26 One common topic of his sermons at that time was the Baptism of the Holy Spirit. His ministry was often mentioned in church newsletters and his wife Amanda contributed an article about him.27 He may have led churches in Grasshopper Valley,28 Cleveland, and Birchwood, Tennessee, in the 1910s.29 George and Amanda had eight children together.30
Hensley's sister Bertha, who lived in Ohio, was also a licensed minister with the Church of God, and he conducted services in Fostoria, Ohio, with her in 1922.31 More articles were published in his denomination's newsletter that documented his ministry, and by the early 1920s, snakes were regularly handled during Church of God services.32
Resignation and divorce
In 1922, Hensley resigned from the Church of God,33 citing &quot;trouble in the home&quot;.34 His resignation marked the zenith of the practice of snake handling in the denomination.35 His departure from the Church of God was accompanied by his estrangement from Amanda.36 One of their children claims that the separation occurred after an incident in which Hensley became drunk and fought with a neighbor. Amanda began working in a Chattanooga hosiery mill after leaving him,37 but became ill and was confined to bed. Some of Hensley's relatives traveled to Chattanooga to care for her.38
Hensley was arrested on moonshine related charges in 1923, sentenced to four months in jail, and given a fine of $100. In lieu of jail time, he was permitted to serve the sentence at Silverdale workhouse. He escaped from the workhouse, however, and evaded recapture, possibly by hiding in the mountains near his sister's farm in Ooltewah. While a fugitive, he may have been arrested and released on unrelated charges39 before fleeing Tennessee to his sister's house in Ohio.40
Return to ministry and second marriage
After arriving in Ohio, Hensley returned to ministry and began holding services in the area41 assisted by Bertha. Because he was illiterate, she would read passages from the bible during services, after which Hensley would deliver a sermon on a theme drawn from the verses.42
While ministering at a Salvation Army church in Ohio, Hensley met 22-year-old Irene Klunzinger. She was from a prosperous Lutheran family of German descent and believed that she was oppressed by a curse placed upon her by gypsies.43 Hensley soon married Irene, though he was about 25 years her elder. After the wedding, they moved to Washingtonville, Ohio, near the home of one of Hensley's brothers. There he found employment at a coal mine and Irene gave birth to their first child. They later moved to nearby Malvern, Ohio, where she bore their second child. The marriage, however, was contentious due to Hensley's frequent unemployment and poor treatment of Irene. He found intermittent employment, including bricklaying and other jobs, but Irene's family had to assist in supporting them; her mother provided the family with clothing. After seven years of marriage, Irene left Hensley to return to her family. She later returned and reconciled with him. One of their children later recalled that Irene was much more religious than Hensley, whom he claims only spoke about spiritual matters when there were church leaders present.44 George and Irene had five children together.45
In 1932, Hensley and his family moved to Pineville, Kentucky. There Hensley returned to pastoring and built the Pinveville Church of God. He did not stay in Pineville, but continued to move frequently. Thomas Burton of East Tennessee State University attributes Hensley's desire to move to &quot;wanderlust&quot;. In July 1935, Irene gave birth to a child in Pennington Gap, Virginia, and a month later, they were living in St. Charles, Virginia and Hensley was holding snake handling services in the area. He succeeded in drawing crowds to his services, and in Norton, Virginia, 500 people attended a snake handling service. The service, however, was thrown into disarray after a boy in the audience killed one of the snakes.46 In 1936, Hensley built a house on the back of a trailer truck and drove to Florida to hold revival services. By March 1936, he had reached Tampa, where he drew over 100 people to a snake handling service.47 He ministered in Bloomingdale, Florida before traveling north to Barrow County, Georgia in late April. During a service in Barrow, a 25-year-old agricultural worker was bitten by a snake and became ill. Hensley predicted that the young man would miraculously recover, but he died. This was the first death to occur due to snakebite in one of Hensley's services. Hensley conducted the man's funeral and left the area for fear of prosecution.48
Hensley traveled to Ohio to bring one of his sons to live with one of Irene's sisters and attend school. He then returned to Pineville, Kentucky where he worked as a railroad conductor and pastored the East Pineville Church of God, but was arrested for handling snakes. He moved to Knoxville in 1939, and bought a nearby farm.49
Ministry in Tennessee
Hensley lived in Tennessee until at least late 1941. He then moved to Evansville, Indiana50 after separating from Irene.51 The cause of the estrangement is unknown, although one of their children claimed that she threatened to have him arrested. She reconciled with him after he promised to find steady employment. They returned to Pineville with their four children. George wanted to put their children in an orphanage so Irene could travel with him, but she refused. After a visit from her sister, Irene again left George, and she and her children went to live with George's children from his first marriage.52 Irene later died of complications following surgery for goiter. George attended the wake and visited his children, but departed without them and did not return.53
Hensley returned to Ooltewah, where he stayed with family members54 and ministered in the area. Snake handling had lost popularity since the late 1920s and groups that promoted Nontrinitarianism had become popular.55 Various churches in the area barred those who practiced snake handling from membership.56
In 1943, Raymond Hayes, a younger man who adhered to Hensley's teachings, arrived in the area and began successfully preaching about snake handling.57 Hayes handled many snakes and performed fire handling stunts.58 In 1945, Hensley and Hayes started a church together; they named it the Dolly Pond Church of God with Signs Following.59 In 1945, a member of the Dolly Pond Church of God with Signs Following was killed by a snakebite. Members of the church continued to handle snakes at services, including at the funeral of the man who died from a snakebite. That year, Hensley was arrested in Chattanooga on charges of snake handling. He was given a $50 fine, which he refused to pay. Though he was threatened with being sentenced to a workhouse, he was released after members of his church spoke with authorities.60
Hensley continued to travel around Tennessee and received a mixed reception from those who were aware of his past. Some of those who knew him were willing to forgive him and welcome him back into ministry, though he remained estranged from most of his family.61 His son Roscoe saw his father preach for the first time in his adult life in 1944, and by then the younger Hensley was himself a pastor.6263
Third and fourth marriages
In 1946, while performing a service in Soddy-Daisy, Tennessee, Hensley met Inez Hutchinson at a service. Hutchinson, a widow with ten children, accepted the doctrine of snake handling after speaking with Hensley. He soon proposed marriage to her, and she accepted. They lived together in that area for several months. Though he had hoped that she would travel with him and read bible passages during his services, she left him after less than a year of marriage.64 After their separation, Hensley began to preach in Chattanooga. During services at that time, he claimed to have been miraculously healed after being paralyzed for a year65 due to an accident while mining coal. Kimbrough disputes his claim, noting that there is no one-year gap in records of Hensley moving or actively ministering.66
In 1951, Hensley married Sally Norman (who was then in her 60s) in Chattanooga. Sally traveled with him as he ministered in Tennessee and Kentucky. In the mid-1950s, they moved to Athens, Georgia.67
Death
In early July 1955, Hensley began a series of meetings near Altha, Florida. He conducted the meetings without snakes for three weeks68 before procuring a  rattlesnake69 from a local zoo and bringing it to a Sunday afternoon service on July 24. Several dozen gathered for the service, which was held at an abandoned blacksmith shop. During the service, Hensley loudly delivered a sermon about faith punctuated by glossolalia. He removed the snake from the  lard can in which it was stored, wrapped it around his neck, and rubbed it on his face.70 He walked around the audience while preaching and returned the snake to the lard can. As he placed the snake into the can, it bit him on his wrist. After a few minutes, Hensley became visibly ill, experiencing severe pain, a discolored arm, and hematemesis. He refused medical attention though he remained in pain71 and was urged to seek medical treatment by congregants and the Calhoun County Sheriff.72 One eyewitness claimed that Hensley attributed his suffering to the congregation's lack of faith,7374 although his wife Sally stated that she believed it was the will of God. Hensley died early the next morning and was buried two days later.75
Hensley's relatives traveled from Tennessee to Florida for his funeral, at which a country music band played.76 He was buried at a cemetery  from the blacksmith shop where he was bitten. After the funeral, some congregants met and declared their intention to continue handling snakes.77 The Calhoun County Sheriff ruled Hensley's death a suicide.78
Theology
Hensley's theology, with the exception of his snake handling doctrine, was typical of other fundamentalist Pentecostal churches.79 His teachings on personal holiness also bore a resemblance to the Wesleyan Holiness tradition.80 In his sermons he condemned a number of practices as sinful, including gambling, consuming alcohol, wearing lipstick, and playing baseball.81
The 16th chapter of the Gospel of Mark formed the core part of Hensley's justification for snake handling.82 He interpreted the passage as a command, rather than an observation of events that would occur in the lives of some Apostles, as it has traditionally been interpreted by Christians. By handling snakes, Hensley saw himself as part of a continuing tradition that originated in a New Testament injunction.83 He stated that the ability to handle poisonous snakes without harm is proof of salvation84 and taught that successfully handling poisonous snakes is evidence of steadfast faith,85 linking the practice with glossolalia.86 He also believed snake handling was a way that God confirms his power to supernaturally deliver people from harm in modern times.87 He saw those who rejected the practice as unbelievers,88 and interpreted the legal difficulties he encountered as religious persecution.89
Legacy
Many writers have attempted to designate one person, often Hensley, as the originator of Appalachian religious snake handling.9091 Kimbrough notes that while many writers have emphasized Hensley's role, their claims are usually unsubstantiated by research and the origins of the religious practice are unclear.92 Hood and Williamson argue that the origin of the practice cannot be credited to one person93 and had several independent origins.94 There is no doubt among historians, however, that Hensley helped to spread the practice of Pentecostal snake handling throughout the Southeast.95
Practitioners of snake handling have viewed Hensley as a great man, and his personal failings have sometimes been dismissed as slanderous fabrication.96 Hensley's personal charisma helped to fuel the snake handling movement.97 Media coverage of the snake handling movement has focused on popular leaders, such as Hensley, and their deaths by snakebite.98 Coverage of his ministry may have prompted various churches to include the practice in their services.99
Notes
References
Bibliography
Category:1880s births Category:1955 deaths Category:Deaths due to animal attacks in the United States Category:Founders of religions Category:Churches of God Christians Category:Deaths due to snake bites
Kimbrough 2002, p. 194.↩
Kimbrough 2002, p. 195.↩
Hood &amp; Williamson 2008, p. 39.↩
Burton 1993, p. 42.↩
Burton 1993, p. 41.↩
Hood &amp; Williamson 2008, p. 42.↩
Hill, Hood &amp; Williamson 2005, p. 116.↩
Hood &amp; Williamson 2008, p. 43.↩
Hill, Hood &amp; Williamson 2005, p. 117.↩
Kimbrough 2002, p. 40.↩
Hood &amp; Williamson 2008, p. 40.↩
Hood &amp; Williamson 2008, p. 44.↩
Hood &amp; Williamson 2008, p. 45.↩
Hood &amp; Williamson 2008, p. 45&lt;U+2013&gt;46.↩
Kimbrough 2002, p. 46.↩
Hood &amp; Williamson 2008, p. 46.↩
Hood &amp; Williamson 2008, p. 47.↩
Hill, Hood &amp; Williamson 2005, p. 220.↩
Burton 1993, p. 43.↩
Burton 1993, p. 44.↩
Burton 1993, p. 46.↩
Burton 1993, p. 47.↩
Burton 1993, p. 48.↩
Burton 1993, p. 49.↩
Burton 1993, p. 50.↩
Burton 1993, p. 52.↩
Burton 1993, p. 53.↩
Burton 1993, p. 54.↩
Burton 1993, p. 56.↩
Kimbrough 2002, p. 115.↩
Burton 1993, p. 57.↩
Kimbrough 2002, p. 133.↩
Hood &amp; Williamson 2008, p. 50.↩
Leonard 1999, p. 235.↩
Burton 1993, p. 45.↩
Hill, Hood &amp; Williamson 2005, p. 118.↩
Kimbrough 2002, p. 132.↩
Kimbrough 2002, p. 191.↩
Hood &amp; Williamson 2008, p. 37.↩
Hood &amp; Williamson 2008, p. 38.↩
Kimbrough 2002, p. 6.↩
Hood &amp; Williamson 2008, p. 41.↩
