&quot;Trading Places&quot; is the thirteenth episode of the ninth season of the animated comedy series Family Guy. It originally aired on Fox in the United States on March 20, 2011.1 The episode follows the Griffin family as they decide to switch roles, in order to teach other a lesson about responsibility, with father Peter and mother Lois becoming the children, and son Chris and daughter Meg becoming the parents of the household. They each discover hardships in their new roles, however, as the switch causes a strain on the family's relationship, and eventually resulting in the ultimate consequence.
The episode was written by Steve Callaghan and directed by Joseph Lee. It received mostly positive reviews from critics for its storyline and many cultural references. The episode featured guest performances by Gary Cole, Nina Dobrev, Carrie Fisher, Rachael MacFarlane, Laura Vandervoort and Lisa Wilhoit, along with several recurring guest voice actors for the series.
Plot
A drunk Tom Tucker is shown on the television, announcing a contest to win a dirtbike. Peter decides to enter the contest, in which the person who keeps their hand on the bike the longest wins. As time goes on, competitors continually begin to give up. Nine hours later, the last two contestants are shown to be Peter and Mayor Adam West, the latter of whom is tricked into taking his hand off the bike when Peter sends him a text message. The next day, Peter's children, Chris and Meg decide to get on the bike and take it for a ride through Quahog. Daring Meg he can jump over a fire hyrant, Chris suddenly crashes the bike, completely destroying it. Once their parents, Peter and Lois, discover that they crashed the bike, they decide to teach the two a lesson by switching roles in the family. Meg and Chris then become the parents, dressing more conservatively, with Meg doing housework and Chris going to the brewery where their father works, and Lois and Peter begin attending school.
Once Chris begins working, his boss, Angela, is surprised to see his work ethic and offers him a raise. That night, after returning home, Chris and Meg alert their parents that switching roles is easier than they thought, with Lois and Peter admitting that they are suffering and being bullied in school. Wanting to call off the role switching, Peter and Lois attempt to get their children to go back to school, but Chris and Meg refuse. Chris then tells his father that he has been hired at the brewery as Peter's replacement. Chris then alerts his parents that he is now the breadwinner, and can make his own rules. In the meantime, Peter attempts to find a new job, as Chris begins working overtime at the brewery. Becoming exhausted by work, Chris begins drinking, and taking his anger out on the family, and eventually suffers a heart attack. Realizing being an adult is just as hard as being a kid, Chris and Meg agree to go back to the way things used to be, and the family goes back to normal.
Production and development
 The episode was written by series regular, executive producer and showrunner Steve Callaghan, and directed by series regular Joseph Lee during the course of the ninth production season.2 Series veterans Peter Shin and James Purdum, both of whom having previously served as animation directors, served as supervising directors for the episode,3 with Andrew Goldberg, Alex Carter, Elaine Ko, Spencer Porter and Aaron Blitzstein serving as staff writers for the episode.4 Composer Ron Jones, who has worked on the series since its inception, returned to compose the music for &quot;Trading Places&quot;.5
In addition to the regular cast, actor Gary Cole, actress Nina Dobrev, actress Carrie Fisher, voice actress Rachael MacFarlane, actress Laura Vandervoort, and voice actress Lisa Wilhoit guest starred in the episode. Recurring guest voice actors Steve Callaghan, writer Danny Smith, writer Alec Sulkin and writer John Viener also made minor appearances.6
Reception
Rowan Kaiser of The A.V. Club gave &quot;Trading Places&quot; a mostly positive review, calling it &quot;relatively entertaining&quot;, and stating that the moral of the episode &quot;surprisingly felt earned, if clich&lt;U+00E9&gt;&quot;. He also praised the episode for giving Chris and Meg &quot;more to do than just be punching bags for annoying jokes&quot;. He rated &quot;Trading Places&quot; a B.7 Jason Hughes of TV Squad was more critical of the episode, complaining about the lack of original ideas. However, he also praised the characterization of Chris and Meg, writing that he enjoyed &quot;seeing Meg step up as a character and be more than the butt of her family's hatred&quot; and &quot;Seth Green was absolutely hilarious during Chris's psychological breakdown leading up to his heart attack&quot;.8
References
External links
Category:2011 television episodes Category:Family Guy (season 9) episodes
↩
↩
↩
↩
