Babylon 5 is an American science fiction television series created, produced and largely written by J. Michael Straczynski. The show centers on the Babylon 5 space station: a focal point for politics, diplomacy, and conflict during the years 2257&lt;U+2013&gt;2262. With its prominent use of planned story arcs, the series was often described as a &quot;novel for television&quot;.12
The pilot film premiered on February 22, 1993. The regular series aired from January 26, 1994 and ran for five full seasons. The show spawned six television films and a spin-off series, Crusade, which aired in 1999 and ran for thirteen episodes. On July 31, 2007, a DVD was released containing two short films about selected characters from the series.
Concept
Having worked on a number of television science fiction shows which had regularly gone over budget, creator J. Michael Straczynski concluded that a lack of long-term planning was to blame, and set about looking at ways in which a series could be done responsibly. Taking note of the lessons of mainstream television, which brought stories to a centralised location such as a hospital, police station, or law office, he decided that instead of &quot;[going] in search of new worlds, building them anew each week,&quot; a fixed space station setting would keep costs at a reasonable level. A fan of sagas such as the Foundation series, Childhood's End, The Lord of the Rings, Dune and Lensman series, Straczynski wondered why no one had done a television series with the same epic sweep, and concurrently with the first idea started developing the concept for a vastly-ambitious epic covering massive battles and other universe-changing events. Realizing that both the fixed-locale series and the epic could be done in a single series, he began to sketch the initial outline of what would become Babylon 5.34
Straczynski set five goals for Babylon 5. He said that the show &quot;would have to be good science fiction&quot; as well as good television -- &quot;rarely are shows both good [science fiction] and good TV; there're  generally one or the other [emphasis in original].&quot; It would have to do for science fiction television what Hill Street Blues had done for police dramas, by taking an adult approach to the subject. It would have to be reasonably budgeted, and &quot;it would have to look unlike anything ever seen before on TV, presenting individual stories against a much broader canvas.&quot; He further stressed that his approach was &quot;to take [science fiction] seriously, to build characters for grown-ups, to incorporate real science but keep the characters at the center of the story.&quot;5 Some of the staples of television science fiction were also out of the question (the show would have &quot;no kids or cute robots&quot;6). The idea was not to present a perfect utopian future, but one with greed and homelessness; one where characters grow, develop, live, and die; one where not everything was the same at the end of the day's events. Citing Mark Twain as an influence, Straczynski said he wanted the show to be a mirror to the real world and to covertly teach.7
Production
Format
Described as a &quot;window on the future&quot; by series production designer John Iacovelli,8 the story is set in the 23rd century on a large O'Neill Colony named &quot;Babylon 5&quot;&lt;U+2014&gt;a five-mile-long, 2.5 million-ton rotating colony designed as a gathering place for the sentient species of the galaxy, in order to foster peace through diplomacy, trade, and cooperation. Instead, acting as a center of political intrigue and conflict, the station becomes the linchpin of a massive interstellar war. This is reflected in the opening monologue of each episode, which includes the words &quot;last, best hope for peace&quot; in season one, changing to &quot;last, best hope for victory&quot; by season three.
The series consists of a coherent five-year story arc taking place over five seasons of 22 episodes each. Unlike most television shows at the time, Babylon 5 was conceived as a &quot;novel for television&quot;, with a defined beginning, middle, and end; in essence, each episode would be a single &quot;chapter&quot; of this &quot;novel&quot;.9 Many of the tie-in novels, comic books, and short stories were also developed to play a significant canonical part in the overall story.10
The cost of the series totalled an estimated $90 million for 110 episodes.11
Writing
Creator and showrunner J. Michael Straczynski wrote 92 of the 110 episodes of Babylon 5, including all 44 episodes in the third and fourth seasons;12 according to Straczynski, a feat never before accomplished in American television.13 Other writers to have contributed scripts to the show include Peter David, Neil Gaiman, Kathryn M. Drennan, Lawrence G. DiTillio, D.C. Fontana, and David Gerrold. Harlan Ellison, a creative consultant on the show, received story credits for two episodes.14 Each writer was informed of the over-arching storyline, enabling the show to be produced consistently under-budget. The rules of production were strict; scripts were written six episodes in advance, and changes could not be made once production had started.15
Though conceived as a whole, it was necessary to adjust the plotline to accommodate external influences. Each of the characters in the series was written with a &quot;trap door&quot; into their background so that, in the event of an actor's unexpected departure from the series, the character could be written out with minimal impact on the storyline.16 In the words of Straczynski, &quot;As a writer, doing a long-term story, it'd be dangerous and short-sighted for me to construct the story without trap doors for every single character. ... That was one of the big risks going into a long-term storyline which I considered long in advance;...&quot;17 The character of Talia Winters was to have undergone a transformation into a Psi Corps secret agent, having been revealed as a &quot;sleeper,&quot; whose true personality was buried subconsciously, and who acted as a spy, observing the events on the station and the actions of her command staff.18 When Winters's portrayer Andrea Thompson left the series, this revelation was used to drop the character from the series.
Ratings for Babylon 5 continued to rise during the show's third season, but going into the fourth season, the impending demise of network PTEN left a fifth year in doubt. Unable to get word one way or the other from parent company Warner Bros., and unwilling to short-change the story and the fans, Straczynski began preparing modifications to the fourth season in order to allow for both eventualities. Straczynski identified three primary plot-threads which would require resolution: the Shadow war, Earth's slide into a dictatorship, and a series of sub-threads which branched off from those. Estimating they would still take around 27 episodes to resolve without having the season feel rushed, the solution came when the TNT network commissioned two Babylon 5 television films. Several hours of material was thus able to be moved into the films, including a three-episode arc which would deal with the background to the Earth&lt;U+2013&gt;Minbari War, and a sub-thread which would have set up the sequel series, Crusade. Further standalone episodes and plot-threads were dropped from season four, which could be inserted into Crusade, or the fifth season, were it to be given the greenlight.19 The intended series finale, &quot;Sleeping in Light&quot;, was filmed during season four as a precaution against cancellation. When word came that TNT had picked up Babylon 5, this was moved to the end of season five and replaced with a newly-filmed season four finale, &quot;The Deconstruction of Falling Stars&quot;.20
Visuals
In anticipation of future HDTV broadcasts and Laserdisc releases, rather than the usual 4:3 format, the series was shot in 16:9, with the image cropped to 4:3 for initial television transmissions.21 Babylon 5 also distinguished itself at a time when models and miniature were still standard by becoming one of the first television shows to use computer technology in creating visual effects. This was achieved using Amiga-based Video Toasters at first, and later Pentium and Alpha-based systems.22 It also attempted to respect Newtonian physics in its effects sequences, with particular emphasis on the effects of inertia.23
Foundation Imaging provided the special effects for the pilot film (for which it won an Emmy) and the first three seasons of the show. After the show's co-executive producer (Douglas Netter) and producer (John Copeland) approached Straczynski with the idea of producing the effects in-house, Straczynski agreed to replace Foundation, for season 4 and 5, once a new team had been established by Netter Digital, and an equal level of quality was assured,24 by using similar technology and a number of former Foundation employees.25 The Emmy-winning alien make-up was provided by Optic Nerve Studios.
Music and scoring
The original pilot film had music composed by Stewart Copeland of The Police.26 When the show was picked up as a weekly series, Copeland was unavailable, so Christopher Franke of Tangerine Dream was hired.27 Franke was the composer for all five seasons of Babylon 5, all but one of the television films, and the Lost Tales DVD.28 When Straczynski obtained funds to create a new producer's cut of the pilot film, the original Copeland score was replaced with a new score by Franke.29 Over thirty soundtrack CDs have been issued featuring Franke's Babylon 5 compositions, including The Best of Babylon 5, released in 2001.30
The Babylon 5 station
 The station is an O'Neill Cylinder, five miles long and a half mile to a mile across, rotating to give artificial gravity. The center is open, and includes fields, hydroponic gardens, and a transport tube running the station length. The station has independent, interconnected sectors, designed differently to avoid claustrophobia. Living areas accommodate the various alien species, including differing atmospheres and gravity. Human visitors to the alien sectors are shown using breathing equipment and other measures to tolerate the conditions. As the series begins, the station is under construction, with only parts completed, others lending to shadowy bowel areas. On some outer levels, the viewports are in floor panels, giving a view into space beneath the feet.31
The station is in the Epsilon Eridani star system, at the fifth Lagrangian point between the fictional planet Epsilon III and its moon.32 The station's first three predecessors (the original Babylon station, Babylon 2 and Babylon 3) were sabotaged or accidentally destroyed before their completion. The fourth station, Babylon 4, vanished twenty-four hours after it became fully operational.33
Civilizations
At the beginning of the series, five dominant civilizations are represented. The dominant species are the Humans, Minbari, Narn, Centauri, and the Vorlons. &quot;The Shadows&quot; and their various allies are malevolent species who appear later in the series. Several dozen less powerful species from the League of Non-Aligned Worlds appear, including the Drazi, Brakiri, Vree, Markab, and pak'ma'ra.
While the original pilot film featured some aliens which were puppets and animatronics, the decision was made early on in the show's production to portray most alien species as humanoid in appearance. Barring isolated appearances, fully computer-generated aliens were discounted as an idea due to the &quot;massive rendering power&quot;34 required. Long-term use of puppets and animatronics was also discounted due to the technological limitations in providing convincing interaction with the human actors (&quot;&lt;U+2026&gt;if you want any real emotion from the character, you're going to have to have an actor inside&quot; [emphasis in original]).35
Languages
There are three primary languages used on the Babylon 5 station: English, as well as the fictional Centauri and Interlac.36 English is mentioned explicitly as the &quot;human language of commerce,&quot;37 and is the baseline language of the station (written signs appearing in all three languages).38 Other human and alien languages do exist in the Babylon 5 universe, though with the exception of Minbari, hearing them spoken is uncommon; when aliens of the same species are speaking to one another, the words heard are English, though it is presumed they are speaking their native tongue. Only when in the presence of humans can the alien language be heard, to stress that the humans cannot understand what is being said.39 With the exception of the Minbari tongue, few other alien languages are actually heard aloud on a regular basis.
The Gaim, pak'ma'ra, and Vorlons do not speak directly in English; in the case of the pak'ma'ra, either because they refuse to learn any language other than their own,40 or because they are incapable of making human sounds.41 Members of these races instead make use of real-time translation devices.42
The principal human characters speak with an American English accent, with the exception of Marcus Cole, who speaks with Jason Carter's natural British English accent. Susan Ivanova, born in Russia, speaks with an American accent, as her character was raised and schooled outside Russia.43 Her father speaks with a distinct Russian accent, as does her brother. Various other minor human characters speak English with recognizable regional accents. Ambassadors Delenn and Londo Mollari, both alien characters, speak with distinct accents similar to Slavic. Delenn speaks with actress Mira Furlan's normal Croatian accent; most other Minbari have native-speaker accents for English (e.g. American English for Lennier, British English for Neroon). Londo's accent was developed independently by actor Peter Jurasik44 and was imitated by William Forward,45 who played Lord Refa. Straczynski has described Londo's accent as being that of the &quot;old school&quot; of the Centauri Imperial Court.46 Narns tend to speak in native-speaker (generally British) accents as well; Andreas Katsulas adopted a dramatic British accent to portray G'Kar.
Use of the Internet
  The show employed Internet marketing to create a buzz among online readers far in advance of the airing of the pilot episode,47 with Straczynski participating in online communities on USENET (in the rec.arts.sf.tv.babylon5.moderated newsgroup), and the GEnie and CompuServe systems before the Web came together as it exists today. The station's location, in &quot;grid epsilon&quot; at coordinates of 470/18/22, was a reference to GEnie (&quot;grid epsilon&quot; = &quot;GE&quot;) and the original forum's address on the system's bulletin boards. Also during this time, Warner Bros. executive Jim Moloshok created and distributed electronic trading cards to help advertise the series.48 In 1995, Warner Bros. started the Official Babylon 5 Website on the now defunct Pathfinder portal. In September 1995, they hired a fan to take over the site and move it to its own domain name, and to oversee the Keyword B5 area on America Online.
Broadcast history
The pilot film, The Gathering, premiered on February 22, 1993, and the regular series initially aired from January 26, 1994 through November 25, 1998,49 first on the short-lived Prime Time Entertainment Network, then on cable network TNT. The show aired every week in the United Kingdom on Channel 4 without a break; as a result the last four or five episodes of the early seasons were shown in the UK before the US.50 The pilot film debuted in the United States with strong viewing figures, achieving a 9.7 in the Nielsen national syndication rankings.51 The series proper debuted with a 6.8 rating/10 share. Figures dipped in its second week, and while it posted a solid 5.0 rating/8 share, with an increase in several major markets,52 ratings for the first season continued to fall, to a low of 3.4 during reruns,53 and then increasing again when new episodes were broadcast in July.
Ratings continued to remain low-to-middling throughout the first four seasons,54 but Babylon 5 scored well with the demographics required to attract the leading national sponsors and saved up to $300,000 per episode by shooting off the studio lot,55 therefore remaining profitable for the network.56 The fifth season, shown on cable network TNT, had ratings about 1.0% lower than seasons two through four.
In the United Kingdom, Babylon 5 was one of the better-rated US television shows on Channel 4,57 and achieved high audience Appreciation Indexes, with season 4's &quot;Endgame&quot; achieving the rare feat of beating the prime-time soap operas for first position.58
On November 25, 1998, after five seasons and 109 aired episodes, Babylon 5 successfully completed its five year story arc when TNT aired the 110th (epilogue) episode &quot;Sleeping in Light&quot;.
Star Trek: Deep Space Nine controversy
The pilot episode of Star Trek: Deep Space Nine (DS9) aired just weeks before the debut of Babylon 5. Babylon 5 creator J. Michael Straczynski indicated that Paramount was aware of his concept as early as 1989,59 when he attempted to sell the show to the studio, and provided them with the series bible, pilot script, artwork, lengthy character background histories, and plot synopses for the first 22 episodes.6061 Paramount passed on Babylon 5, but later announced Deep Space Nine was in development after Warner Bros. announced its plans for Babylon 5. Straczynski has stated on numerous occasions that he thinks Paramount may have used his bible and scripts as the basis for DS9's first season.6263
Cast
Regular cast
Mary Kay Adams as Na'Toth (season two)
Julie Caitlin Brown as Na'Toth (season one, guest in season five)
Richard Biggs as Dr. Stephen Franklin
Bruce Boxleitner as John Sheridan (seasons two &lt;U+2013&gt; five and The Lost Tales)
Jason Carter as Marcus Cole (seasons three &lt;U+2013&gt; four)
Claudia Christian as Susan Ivanova (seasons one &lt;U+2013&gt; four)
Jeff Conaway as Zack Allan (recurring in season two, starring in seasons three &lt;U+2013&gt; five)
Jerry Doyle as Michael Garibaldi
Mira Furlan as Delenn
Stephen Furst as Vir Cotto
Peter Jurasik as Londo Mollari
Andreas Katsulas as G'Kar
Bill Mumy as Lennier
Michael O'Hare as Jeffrey Sinclair / Valen (season one, guest in seasons two and three)
Robert Rusler as Warren Keffer (season two)
Tracy Scoggins as Elizabeth Lochley (season five and The Lost Tales)
Patricia Tallman as Lyta Alexander (pilot, recurring in seasons two &lt;U+2013&gt; three, starring in seasons four &lt;U+2013&gt; five)
Andrea Thompson as Talia Winters (seasons one &lt;U+2013&gt; two)
Recurring guests
Wayne Alexander as Lorien / Shiv'kala the Drakh / Sebastian/&quot;Jack&quot; / others (12 episodes)
Ardwight Chamberlain (voice) as Kosh Naranek (seasons one &lt;U+2013&gt; four) (23 episodes)
Tim Choate as Zathras (4 episodes)
Joshua Cox as David Corwin (34 episodes)
David L. Crowley as Lou Welch (7 episodes)
Robin Atkin Downes as Byron (9 episodes)
William Forward64 as Lord Antono Refa (6 episodes)
Robert Foxworth as General William Hague (2 episodes)
Denise Gentile as Lise Hampton (9 episodes)
Melissa Gilbert as Anna Sheridan (2 episodes)
Lenore Kasdorf as ISN Reporter (3 episodes)
Walter Koenig as Alfred Bester (12 episodes)
Wortham Krimmer as Emperor Cartagia (5 episodes)
Damian London as Regent Virini (9 episodes)
Marjorie Monaghan as Number One (7 episodes)
Julia Nickson-Soul as Catherine Sakai (3 episodes)
John Schuck as Draal (2 episodes)
Marshall Teague as Ta'Lon / Nelson Drake (6 episodes)
Louis Turenne as Brother Theo / Draal (5 episodes)
John Vickery as Neroon / Mr. Welles (6 episodes)
Ed Wasser as Morden / Guerra (14 episodes)
Efrem Zimbalist, Jr. as William Edgars (4 episodes)
In addition, several other actors have filled more than one minor role on the series. Kim Strauss played the Drazi Ambassador in four episodes, as well as nine other characters in ten more episodes.65 Some actors had difficulty dealing with the application of prosthetics required to play some of the alien characters. The producers therefore used the same group of people (as many as twelve) in various mid-level speaking roles, taking full head and body casts from each. The group came to be unofficially known by the production as the &quot;Babylon 5 Alien Rep Group.&quot;66
Awards
Awards presented to Babylon 5 include:
Emmy Award: Outstanding Individual Achievement in Special Visual Effects, 1993 (The Gathering)67
Emmy Award: ''Outstanding Individual Achievement in Hairstyling for a Series '', 1994 (episode, &quot;The Parliament of Dreams&quot;)68
Hugo Award: Best Dramatic Presentation, 1996 (episode, &quot;The Coming of Shadows&quot;)69
Hugo Award: Best Dramatic Presentation, 1997 (episode, &quot;Severed Dreams&quot;)70
Saturn Award: Best Syndicated/Cable Television Series, 199871
Space Frontier Foundation Award: Vision of the Future, 1994
Space Frontier Foundation Award: Vision of the Future, 1996
E Pluribus Unum Award: (Presented By American Cinema Association), 199772
Nominated Awards include:
Emmy Award: Outstanding Individual Achievement in Makeup for a Series, 1995 (episode, &quot;Acts of Sacrifice&quot;)73
Emmy Award: Outstanding Individual Achievement in Hairstyling for a Series, 1995 (episode, &quot;The Geometry of Shadows&quot;)
Emmy Award: Outstanding Individual Achievement in Cinematography for a Series, 1995 (episode, &quot;The Geometry Of Shadows&quot;)
Emmy Award: Outstanding Cinematography for a Series, 1996
Emmy Award: Outstanding Makeup for a Series, 1997 (episode, &quot;The Summoning&quot;)
Emmy Award: Outstanding Makeup for a Series, 1998 (tv movie, In The Beginning)
Plot summary
The five seasons of the series each correspond to one fictional sequential year in the period 2258&lt;U+2013&gt;2262. Each season shares its name with an episode that is central to that season's plot. As the series starts, the Babylon 5 station is welcoming ambassadors from various races in the galaxy. Earth has just barely survived an accidental war with the powerful Minbari, who, despite their superior technology, mysteriously surrendered at the brink of the destruction of the human race (the Battle of the Line).
Season 1 &lt;U+2013&gt; year 2258
During 2258, Commander Jeffrey Sinclair is in charge of the station. Much of the story revolves around his gradual discovery that it was his capture by the Minbari at the Battle of the Line which ended the war against Earth. Upon capturing Sinclair, the Minbari came to believe that Valen, a great Minbari leader and hero of the last Minbari-Shadow war, had been reincarnated as the Commander. Concluding that others of their species had been, and were continuing to be reborn as humans, and in obedience to the edict that Minbari do not kill one another, lest they harm the soul, they stopped the war just as Earth's final defenses were on the verge of collapse.
It is gradually revealed that Ambassador Delenn is a member of the mysterious and powerful Grey Council, the ruling body of the Minbari. Towards the end of 2258, she begins the transformation into a Minbari-human hybrid, ostensibly to build a bridge between the humans and Minbari. The year ends with the assassination of Earth Alliance President Luis Santiago, and rising tension between the Narn and Centauri, after a Narn outpost is completely destroyed by an unknown third party.
Season 2 &lt;U+2013&gt; year 2259
At the beginning of 2259, Captain John Sheridan replaces Sinclair as the military governor of the station. He and the command staff learn that the death of President Santiago was actually an assassination masterminded by Vice President Clark (who assumed the Presidency upon Santiago's death). A conflict develops between the Babylon 5 command staff and the Psi Corps, an increasingly autocratic organization which oversees and controls the lives of human telepaths. Commander Ivanova, the second-in-command of the station, is secretly a latent telepath who has illicitly avoided registering with the Psi Corps.
The Shadows, an ancient and extremely powerful race who have recently emerged from hibernation, are revealed to be the cause of a variety of mysterious and disturbing events, including the attack on the Narn outpost at the end of 2258. Centauri Ambassador Londo Mollari unknowingly enlists their aid through his association with the mysterious Mr. Morden in the ongoing conflict with the Narn. The elderly and ailing Centauri emperor, long an advocate of reconciliation with the Narn, dies suddenly while visiting Babylon 5. A number of conspirators, including Londo Mollari and Refa, take control of Centauri government by assassinating their opponents and placing the late emperor's unstable nephew on the throne. Their first act is to start open aggression against the Narn. After full-scale war breaks out, the Centauri eventually conquer Narn in a brutal attack involving mass drivers, outlawed weapons of mass destruction. Towards the end of the year, the Clark administration begins to show increasingly totalitarian characteristics, clamping down on dissent and restricting freedom of speech. The Vorlons are revealed to be the basis of legends about angels on various worlds, including Earth, and are the ancient enemies of the Shadows. They enlist the aid of Sheridan and the Babylon 5 command staff in the struggle against the Shadows.
Season 3 &lt;U+2013&gt; year 2260
The Psi Corps and President Clark, whose government has discovered Shadow vessels buried in Earth's solar system, begin to harness the vessels' advanced technology. The Clark administration continues to become increasingly xenophobic and totalitarian, and uses a military incident as an excuse to declare martial law. This triggers a war of independence on Mars, which had long had a strained political relationship with Earth. Babylon 5 also declares independence from Earth, along with several other outlying Earth Alliance colonies. In response, the Earth Alliance attempts to retake Babylon 5 by force, but with the aid of the Minbari, who have allied with the station against the growing Shadow threat, the attack is repelled.
Becoming concerned over the Shadows' growing influence amongst his people, Centauri ambassador Londo Mollari attempts to sever ties with them. Mr. Morden, the Shadows' human representative, tricks him into restoring the partnership by engineering the murder of Mollari's mistress. Open warfare breaks out between the Shadows and the alliance led by Babylon 5 and the Minbari. It is learned that genetic manipulation by the Vorlons is the source of human telepathy, as it is later discovered that Shadow ships are vulnerable to telepathic attacks. Displeased at the Vorlons' lack of direct action against the Shadows, Captain John Sheridan browbeats Vorlon ambassador Kosh Naranek into launching an attack against their mutual enemy. Kosh's deeds lead to his subsequent assassination by the Shadows.
Upon returning to the station, former commander Jeffrey Sinclair enlists the aid of Captain Sheridan, Delenn, Ivanova and Marcus and convinces them to help him steal the Babylon 4 space station, intending to send it back in time 1,000 years to use it as a base of operations against the Shadows in the first Minbari-Shadow war. Undergoing the same transformation as Delenn at the end of Season 1, Sinclair transforms into a Minbari and is subsequently revealed to be the actual Valen of Minbari legend, rather than a reincarnation. Spurred by the reappearance of his assumed-dead wife (who now works for the Shadows), Sheridan travels to Z'ha'dum, the Shadow homeworld, in an attempt by them to recruit him. However he instead destroys their largest city in a kamikaze nuclear attack, and is last seen jumping into a miles-deep pit to escape the explosion. Garibaldi, during a fight with Shadow vessels, goes missing.
Season 4 &lt;U+2013&gt; year 2261
In 2261, the Vorlons join the Shadow War, but their tactics become a concern for the alliance when the Vorlons begin destroying entire planets which they deem to have been &quot;influenced&quot; by the Shadows. Disturbed by this turn of events, Babylon 5 recruits several other powerful and ancient races (the First Ones) to their cause, against both the Shadows and the Vorlons. Captain John Sheridan returns to the station after escaping the destruction of Z'ha'dum, but at a price: barring illness or injury, he has only 20 years left to live. He is accompanied by a mysterious alien named Lorien who claims to be the oldest sentient being in the galaxy.
Hours before Sheridan's return, Garibaldi is rescued back to the station, in rather dubious circumstances. He is markedly more paranoid and suspicious of other alien races and of Sheridan than he was before.
Centauri Emperor Cartagia forges a relationship with the Shadows. Londo Mollari engineers the assassination of Cartagia and repudiates his agreement with the Shadows. Londo kills Mr. Morden and destroys the Shadow vessels based on the Centauri homeworld, in an attempt to save his planet from destruction by the Vorlons. Aided by the other ancient races, and several younger ones, Sheridan lures both the Vorlons and the Shadows into an immense battle, during which the Vorlons and Shadows reveal that they have been left as guardians of the younger races, but due to philosophical differences, ended up using them as pawns in their endless wars throughout the ages. The younger races reject their continued interference, and the Vorlons and Shadows, along with the remaining First Ones, agree to depart the galaxy forever.
After the Shadows are defeated Garibaldi leaves his post as security chief and works on his own as a &quot;provider of information&quot;. Garibaldi was actually abducted by the Psi-Corps at the end of Season 3 and re-programmed by Bester to provide information to him at the right time.
Minbar is gripped by a brief civil war between the Warrior and Religious castes. Delenn secretly meets with Neroon of the Warrior caste and convinces him that neither side can be allowed to win. She tells him that she will undergo a ritual wherein she will be willing to sacrifice herself, but will stop the ritual before she actually dies. When Neroon sees that she actually intends to go through the entire ritual, he rescues her and sacrifices himself instead, declaring that, although he was born Warrior, in his heart he is Religious.
As part of the ongoing conflict between Earth and Babylon 5, Garibaldi betrays Sheridan and arranges his capture. Garibaldi later reveals to Bester about a virus that is dangerous to only telepaths, which the Psi-Corps then destroys. Bester releases Garibaldi of his programming, and allows him to remember everything he has done since being kidnapped. Garibaldi helps free Sheridan and return him to the campaign to free Earth. An alliance led by Babylon 5 frees Earth from totalitarian rule by President Clark in a short but bloody war. This culminates in Clark's suicide and the restoration of democratic government. Mars is granted full independence, and Sheridan agrees to step down as commander of Babylon 5. The League of Non-Aligned Worlds is dissolved and reformed into the Interstellar Alliance, with Sheridan elected as its first President and continuing his command of the Rangers, who are to act as a galactic equivalent of United Nations peacekeepers.
In the season finale, the events of 100, 500, 1000, and one million years into the future are shown, depicting Babylon 5's lasting influence throughout history. Amongst the events shown are the political aftermath of the 2261 civil war, a subsequent nuclear war on Earth involving a new totalitarian government in the year AD 2762, the resulting fall of Earth into a pre-industrial society, the loss and restoration of humanity's knowledge of space travel, and the final evolution of mankind into energy beings similar to the Vorlons, after which Earth's sun goes nova.
Season 5 &lt;U+2013&gt; year 2262
In 2262, Earthforce Captain Elizabeth Lochley is appointed to command Babylon 5. The station grows in its role as a sanctuary for rogue telepaths running from the Psi Corps, resulting in a violent conflict. G'Kar, former Narn ambassador to Babylon 5, becomes a spiritual leader after a book was published that he wrote while incarcerated during the Narn-Centauri War. The Drakh, former allies of the Shadows who remained in the galaxy, take control of Regent Virini on Centauri Prime through a parasitic creature called a Keeper, then incite a war between the Centauri and the Interstellar Alliance, in order to isolate the Centauri from the Alliance, and gain a malleable homeworld for themselves.
Centauri Prime is consequently decimated by Narn and Drazi warships, and Londo Mollari becomes emperor, accepting a Drakh Keeper under threat of the complete nuclear destruction of the planet. Portions of the end of his reign are seen in various prescient visions throughout the series; one such sequence shows Mollari and former nemesis (and later friend) G'Kar dying at each other's throats in an act of mutual suicide. Vir Cotto, Mollari's loyal and more moral aide, succeeds him as emperor, free of Drakh influence. Sheridan and Delenn marry and move to Minbar, along with the headquarters of the Interstellar Alliance.
Twenty years later, on the verge of death, Sheridan takes one final trip to the now-obsolete Babylon 5 station before its decommissioning. Sheridan apparently dies, but is claimed by the First Ones, who invite him to join them on a journey beyond the rim of the galaxy. The Babylon 5 station is completely destroyed in a planned demolition shortly after Sheridan's departure, its existence no longer necessary as the Alliance has taken over its diplomatic purposes. This final episode features a cameo appearance by Straczynski as the technician who switches off the lights before Babylon 5 is evacuated and destroyed.
Themes
Throughout its run, Babylon 5 found ways to portray themes relevant to modern and historical social issues. It marked several firsts in television science fiction, such as the exploration of the political and social landscapes of the first human colonies, their interactions with Earth, and the underlying tensions.74 Babylon 5 was also one of the first television science fiction shows to denotatively refer to a same-sex relationship.7576 In the show, sexual orientation is as much of an issue as &quot;being left-handed or right-handed&quot;.77 Unrequited love is explored as a source of pain for the characters, though not all the relationships end unhappily.78
Order vs. chaos; authoritarianism vs. free will
The clash between order and chaos, and the people caught in between, plays an important role in Babylon 5. The conflict between two unimaginably powerful older races, the Vorlons and the Shadows, is represented as a battle between two competing ideologies, each seeking to turn the humans and the other younger races to their beliefs. The Vorlons represent an authoritarian philosophy: you will do what we tell you to, because we tell you to do it. The Vorlon question, &quot;Who are you?&quot; focuses on identity as a catalyst for shaping personal goals;7980 the intention is not to solicit a &quot;correct&quot; answer, but to &quot;tear down the artifices we construct around ourselves until we're left facing ourselves, not our roles.&quot;81 The Shadows represent a philosophy of evolution through fire, of sowing the seeds of conflict in order to engender progress.82 The question the Shadows ask is &quot;What do you want?&quot; In contrast to the Vorlons, they place personal desire and ambition first, using it to shape identity,83 encouraging conflict between groups who choose to serve their own glory or profit.84 The representation of order and chaos was informed by the Babylonian myth that the universe was born in the conflict between both. The climax of this conflict comes with the younger races' exposing of the Vorlons' and the Shadows' &quot;true faces&quot;85 and the rejection of both philosophies,86 heralding the dawn of a new age without their interference.
The notion that the war was about &quot;killing your parents&quot;87 is echoed in the portrayal of the civil war between the human colonies and Earth. Deliberately dealing in historical and political metaphor, with particular emphasis upon McCarthyism and HUAC,88 the Earth Alliance becomes increasingly-authoritarian, eventually sliding into a dictatorship. The show examines the impositions on civil liberties which aid its rise, and the self-delusion of a populace which believes its moral superiority will never allow a dictatorship to come to power, until it is too late.89 The successful rebellion led by the Babylon 5 station results in the restoration of a democratic government, and true autonomy for Mars and the colonies.90
War and peace
The Babylon 5 universe deals with numerous armed conflicts which range on an interstellar scale. The story begins in the aftermath of a war which brought the human race to the brink of extinction, caused by a misunderstanding during a first contact situation.91 The Babylon 5 station is subsequently built in order to foster peace through diplomacy, described as the &quot;last, best hope for peace&quot; in the opening credits monologue during its first three seasons. Wars between separate alien civilizations are featured. The conflict between the Narn and the Centauri is followed from its beginnings as a minor territorial dispute amplified by historical animosity, through to its end, in which weapons of mass destruction are employed to subjugate and enslave an entire planet. The war is an attempt to portray a more sobering kind of conflict than usually seen on science fiction television. Informed by the events of the first Gulf War, the Cuban Missile Crisis and the Soviet invasion of Prague, the intent was to recreate these moments when &quot;the world held its breath&quot; and the emotional core of the conflict was the disbelief that the situation could have occurred at all, and the desperation to find a way to bring it to an end.92 By the start of the third season, the opening monologue had changed to say that the Babylon 5 station is the &quot;last, best hope for victory,&quot; indicating that while peace is a laudable accomplishment, it can also mean a capitulation to an enemy intent on committing horrendous acts, and that &quot;peace is a byproduct of victory against those who do not want peace.&quot;93
The Shadow War also features prominently in the show, during which an advanced alien species attempts to sow the seeds of conflict in order to promote technological and cultural advancement. The gradual discovery of the scheme and the rebellion against it, serve as the backdrop to the first three seasons,94 but also as a metaphor for the war within ourselves. The concurrent limiting of civil liberties and Earth's descent into a dictatorship are &quot;shadow wars&quot; of their own.95 In ending the Shadow War before the conclusion of the series, the show was able to more fully explore its aftermath, and it is this &quot;war at home&quot; which forms the bulk of the remaining two seasons. The struggle for independence between Mars and Earth culminates with a civil war between the human colonies (led by the Babylon 5 station) and the home planet. Choosing Mars as both the spark for the civil war, and the staging ground for its dramatic conclusion, enabled the viewer to understand the conflict more fully than had it involved an anonymous colony orbiting a distant star.96 The conflict, and the reasons behind it, were informed by Nazism, McCarthyism and the breakup of Yugoslavia,97 and the unraveling of the former Balkan country also served as partial inspiration for another civil war, which involved the alien Minbari.9899
The post-war landscape has its roots in the Reconstruction. The attempt to resolve the issues of the American Civil War after the conflict had ended, and this struggle for survival in a changed world was also informed by works such as Alas, Babylon, a novel dealing with the after-effects of a nuclear war on a small American town.100 The show expresses that the end of these wars is not an end to war itself. Events shown hundreds of years into the show's future tell of wars which will once again bring the human race to the edge of annihilation, demonstrating that mankind will not change, and the best that can be hoped for after it falls is that it climbs a little higher each time, until it can one day &quot;take [its] place among the stars, teaching those who follow.&quot;101
Religion
Acknowledging the continued existence of faith, even in a science fiction setting,102 many of Babylon 5's characters have profound spiritual or religious beliefs, reflecting that throughout history, religion has been present in one form or another and will remain so even in a far-future rich with technological advancement.103 Many of Earth's contemporary religions are shown to still be in existence, and the main human characters often have religious convictions, including Roman Catholicism, Jesuit beliefs, Judaism and the fictional Foundationism, which was created specifically for the show.104 Earth's religions have also had to deal with the existence of extraterrestrial belief systems, resulting in a cross-pollination of ideas,105 and the factionization or destruction of some,106 while in the show's third season, a community of monks takes up residence on the Babylon 5 station, in order to learn what the other races throughout the universe call God,107 and to come to a better understanding of the different religions through study at close quarters.108 Alien beliefs in the show range from the Centauri's Bacchanalian-influenced religions,109 of which there are up to seventy different denominations,110 to the more pantheistic, as with the Narn and Minbari religions.111
Depictions of religion on the show, human and alien, sometimes come subtly, or are the main theme of an episode;112 the first season episode &quot;The Parliament of Dreams&quot; is a conventional &quot;showcase&quot; for religion, in which each species on the Babylon 5 station has an opportunity to demonstrate its beliefs,113 and &quot;Passing Through Gethsemane&quot; focuses on a specific position of Roman Catholic dogma,114 as well as concepts of justice, vengeance and biblical forgiveness.115 Other treatments have been more contentious, such as the David Gerrold-scripted &quot;Believers&quot;, in which alien parents would rather see their son die than undergo a life-saving operation because their religious beliefs forbid it.116 By presenting the viewer with characters' spiritual beliefs, motivations are supplied for what might otherwise be construed as arbitrary behavior; these motivations are not necessarily based on truth, leading to misconceptions which in due course become important plot points.117 A typical question for Babylon 5 to present is a series of events which can initially be interpreted as having either a scientific or a spiritual explanation; while ultimately suggesting the former in most cases, occasionally the issue is left open.118 In others, where religious belief is an integral part of the storyline, the show attempts to balance all sides of the argument, as in &quot;Soul Hunter&quot;, where the spiritual concept explored is that of the immortal soul, and whether after death it is destroyed, reincarnated or simply does not exist. The character arguing the latter, Doctor Stephen Franklin, is often put into the more spiritual storylines, as his scientific rationality presents a contrast with the unexplainable which creates dramatic conflict,119 and while the show's creator and main writer identifies as an atheist,120 undercurrents of religions as diverse as Buddhism have been noted as running through many of the characters' words.121 Passages, often the same ones, take on distinct meanings to viewers of differing faiths; the show ultimately expresses ideas which cross religious boundaries.122
Sacrifice
A major theme in Babylon 5 is the concept of sacrifice for a greater cause. Kosh sacrifices his life for a first victory against the Shadows. John Sheridan is ready to die at Z'ha'dum. Delenn is ready to die in the starfire wheel to restore Minbari society. Marcus Cole gives his life to save Susan Ivanova. Londo Mollari willingly accepts complete enslavement by a Drakh keeper to save the Centauri from annihilation. Many minor characters also willingly give their lives such as the crew of Drazi or Minbari ships in the final confrontation with the Shadows to save the Army of Light's leaders, some Centauri staying back at the island of Selini to allow the destruction of the Shadow warships, and so on. &quot;Some of us must be sacrificed if all are to be saved.&quot; is the spiritual epiphany experienced by G'Kar. This reflects the Vorlon philosophy in contrast to the self-interest philosophy of the Shadows. But it also reflects the fact that Babylon 5 is a big epic where believable &quot;greater causes&quot; can be established throughout the different storylines that also contain complex character development.
Dreams and visions
The subliminal and subconscious play a very significant role in the Babylon 5 universe. Every single major character experiences, on at least one occasion, some altered state of consciousness in which he or she receives some sort of important mental message. This could either be one that further fleshes out the character for the benefit of the viewer, or one of transcendental and transpersonal nature that anticipates important further developments in the storyline. Some of these signs and portents resemble lucid dreams, but many are quite bizarre and &quot;dreamlike,&quot; frequently in a spiritual context.
Addiction
Substance abuse and its impact on human personalities also plays a significant role in the Babylon 5 storyline. The station's security chief, Michael Garibaldi, is a textbook relapsing-remitting alcoholic of the binge drinking type; he practices complete abstinence from alcohol throughout most of the series (with one notable exception) until the middle of season five. He only recovers physically and socially and breaks the cycle at the end of the season. Dr. Stephen Franklin develops an (initially unrecognized) addiction to injectable stimulant drugs while trying to cope with the chronic stress and work overload in Medlab (stemming from the Markab extinction), and wanders off to the homeless and deprived in Brown Sector, where he suffers through a severe withdrawal syndrome. Executive Officer Susan Ivanova mentions that her father became an alcoholic after her mother had committed suicide after having been drugged by the authorities over a number of years. Captain Elizabeth Lochley tells Garibaldi that her father was an alcoholic and that she is a recovering alcoholic herself.123 Among the aliens, Londo Mollari is at least a heavy abuser of alcohol, mostly in the form of the Centauri national drink, Brivari (though in Centauri culture, sobriety, as opposed to drunkenness, is considered a vice).
Numerous other references to substance abuse and drug dealing are scattered throughout the storyline, including Dust, a white powder with a black-market presence comparable to cocaine. &quot;Dust&quot; turns out to be a &quot;designer drug&quot; developed by Psi Corps and placed into the black market as an experiment to see if psychic abilities could be brought out in &quot;mundanes&quot; (non-telepaths).
Television movies
During and after production of Babylon 5, six television movies, set in the Babylon 5 universe, have been produced.
The Gathering&lt;U+2014&gt;(February 22, 1993)
In the Beginning&lt;U+2014&gt;(January 4, 1998)
Thirdspace&lt;U+2014&gt;(July 19, 1998)
The River of Souls&lt;U+2014&gt;(November 8, 1998)
A Call to Arms&lt;U+2014&gt;(January 3, 1999)
The Legend of the Rangers (To Live and Die in Starlight)&lt;U+2014&gt;(January 19, 2002)124
The Gathering is the pilot, depicting the arrival of the major characters to the Babylon 5 station in 2257. In the Beginning depicts the events of the Earth-Minbari War, as revealed in the first few seasons, in chronological order and in greater detail than the main series. Thirdspace and The River of Souls are largely stand-alone episodes.
A Call to Arms sets up the initial premise of the Crusade series, depicting the alien Drakh species releasing a nanovirus plague on Earth, which will destroy all life on the planet within five years if it is not stopped. To that end, the destroyer Excalibur is sent to look for a cure beyond Earth. To Live and Die in Starlight, also known as Babylon 5: The Legend of the Rangers, was intended as the pilot for the series of the same (Legend of the Rangers) name, but since the show was never picked up, it is now considered to be the sixth and last Babylon 5 telefilm.
Spin-offs
Crusade
The spin-off series Crusade125 ran on TNT for thirteen episodes, having been set up by the TV film A Call to Arms. The production team received help from NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory to make sure that the series depicted science and technology accurately.126 However, creative differences between Straczynski and TNT caused problems; the network wanted more sex and violence,127 and forced Straczynski to begin the first episode with a fistfight. The sex-and-violence request was later withdrawn, and TNT allocated more money to Crusade, giving the actors better uniforms and new sets mid-season. However, due to the creative differences, TNT eventually decided to cancel the series after thirteen episodes had been produced, but before any of them were aired. At the time of the cancellation, only hints of major story arcs had yet come into play, though unproduced scripts published online by Straczynski&lt;U+2014&gt;in addition to comments made by him online, at conventions, and on the Crusade DVD commentaries&lt;U+2014&gt;reveal that they would have become prominent features of the series, had it continued.
Legend of the Rangers
A television film titled To Live and Die in Starlight was produced by the Sci Fi Channel. It was the proposed pilot episode of a new series titled Babylon 5: The Legend of the Rangers. Rescheduled after the September 11, 2001 attacks, the film aired on January 19, 2002. However, it was scheduled against an NFL AFC Divisional Championship playoff game. The pilot's poor ratings contributed to the lessening of the network's interest in a series pick-up, as did the poor reception it received from fans and critics alike, particularly for its depiction of a virtual-reality weapon, but the final nail in its coffin was the dispute between Warner Bros. and Vivendi Universal (owners of the Sci Fi Channel) over revenue-sharing for the potential weekly series.
The Lost Tales
A new project set in Babylon 5 universe was announced by Straczynski at San Diego Comic Con 2006.128 Babylon 5: The Lost Tales is a set of mini-stories featuring established characters from the series, released direct-to-DVD. Production of the first anthology of two stories, named collectively Voices in the Dark, commenced in November 2006 with Straczynski writing, producing, and directing. It was released July 31, 2007. In a Usenet post on September 5, 2007, Straczynski stated that Warner Bros. &quot;are most pleased as sales have been several orders of magnitude beyond what they anticipated.&quot;129
On July 13, 2008, Straczynski revealed that he had no plans to continue The Lost Tales. He said that although the studio was interested in another disc, they wanted to budget the next installment similarly to the first. Citing his disappointment with the first release due to the low budget, Straczynski said he did not want to dilute Babylon 5's legacy with further sub-par stories. He stated that he would only return to the Babylon 5 universe if Warner Bros. wanted to do a large-budgeted cinema release.130
The Memory of Shadows (unproduced)
In 2004 and early 2005, rumors widely circulated about a planned Babylon 5 film for theatrical release. However, on February 25, 2005, a post from Straczynski announced that the project had fallen through, and was for all practical purposes dead.131 The proposed film, titled The Memory of Shadows (TMoS), was written by Straczynski. Filming was to have begun in April 2005 in the UK, with Steven Beck as the director.132
During the &quot;Spotlight on J. Michael Straczynski&quot; panel at the 2010 New York Comic Con, Straczynski revealed &lt;U+201C&gt;I said to Warner Bros. a while back, 'When you&lt;U+2019&gt;re ready to do something real with 'Babylon 5,' either a big-budget film or a TV show, if you want to do one of those two things, call me, otherwise don&lt;U+2019&gt;t bother me.' About a month ago the phone rang. I don&lt;U+2019&gt;t know where this is gonna go yet, but when they call you, there&lt;U+2019&gt;s something going on. I can&lt;U+2019&gt;t tell you what it is yet and it may not go anywhere, but there is movement in the tall grass.&lt;U+201D&gt;133
Novels, short stories and comic books
Unique to the Babylon 5 universe among virtually all other shared media universes is the sanctioned canonicity of many of its offshoot novels and comic book stories; nearly all of the Babylon 5 novels and novelizations to date having been based on outlines written directly by J. Michael Straczynski. The later Del Rey books are considered to be more canonical than some of the earlier Del ones, and at least two major plotline revelations were made in the DC Comics series that were directly referenced in the TV series. In all, per Straczynski's own remarks, canonical elements exist in every single book or comic published to date, and his deeper involvement in the novel-publishing program from 1996 onward has ensured a greater level of canonicity within such works.
Additionally, Straczynski himself penned a number of short stories, published in Amazing Stories magazine, expanding on several key story-points from the television series, along with a number of other established authors, with all such tales considered as &quot;real&quot; as the TV show itself.
As of 2007, Straczynski was still writing the manuscript for a Babylon 5 graphic novel, which was to be published by Wildstorm Productions. The premise, characters, and plot have not been officially confirmed, but it has been reported that Straczynski originally planned to write a story that takes place before the season three two-parter &quot;War Without End&quot;, featuring Sinclair and Sheridan, and involving Mars, Minbar, Babylon 5, and a conspiracy. It has also been reported that he subsequently decided to tie in elements from the spin-offs Crusade and Legend of the Rangers into the book.134 The graphic novel was to be 100 pages long.
When asked by a fan during the &quot;Spotlight on J. Michael Straczynski&quot; panel at the 2010 New York Comic Con, Straczynski said no new Babylon 5 comics were in the works.135
DVD releases
Season releases
 All five seasons have been released individually as a set of six DVDs in the US and the UK. A complete five season set of 30 DVDs is also available in each of the two DVD regions, titled Babylon 5: The Complete Television Series for the US and Canada, and Babylon 5: The Complete Universe for the UK. The UK version also includes all the films and the short-lived spin-off Crusade. As of 2007, all 5 television seasons and their individual episodes are also for sale at the iTunes Store. The first five seasons have been recently re-released on DVD with publishing dates of June 2009.
According to producer J. Michael Straczynski as of mid-2006, &quot;The DVD sales have raised over 500 million in revenue.&quot; The financial success of the DVD box sets has led to a renewed interest in further Babylon 5 work.136
DVD Name
Region 1
Region 2
Babylon 5: The Complete First Season
November 5, 2002
October 28, 2002
Babylon 5: The Complete Second Season
April 29, 2003
May 26, 2003
Babylon 5: The Complete Third Season
August 12, 2003
November 10, 2003
Babylon 5: The Complete Fourth Season
January 6, 2004
April 19, 2004
Babylon 5: The Complete Fifth Season
April 13, 2004
January 17, 2005
Babylon 5: The Complete Television Series
August 17, 2004
N/A
Babylon 5: The Complete Universe
N/A
October 24, 2005
Babylon 5: The Complete Collection (Amazon.co.uk Exclusive)
N/A
November 5, 2007
Babylon 5 TV film releases
 The Babylon 5 TV films were distributed differently in the US and UK. Initially a DVD containing the two films The Gathering and In the Beginning were released on both region 1 (North America) and region 2 (UK) DVD. Then, in the US, the first five films, which aired while Babylon 5 was still on the air, were released in one boxset, with the TV film Legend of the Rangers getting its own separate release on both region 1 and region 2 DVD. In the UK, a film boxset was released, but instead of containing the five films like the US version, it contained only the three films which had not been released in the UK yet (Thirdspace, River of Souls, and A Call to Arms). The Gathering was released as a low-priced promotional R1 DVD in 2004, intended as a trial of the series proper; Warner Bros. issued several such DVDs but discontinued the line shortly thereafter due to lack of interest.
DVD name
Region 1
Region 2
Babylon 5: The Gathering/In the Beginning
December 4, 2001
N/A
Babylon 5: The Gathering
N/A
April 8, 2002
Babylon 5: In the Beginning
N/A
April 8, 2002
Babylon 5: The Movie Collection
August 17, 2004
N/A
Babylon 5: Movie Box Set
N/A
February 21, 2005
Babylon 5: The Legend of the Rangers
March 14, 2006
October 24, 2005
Babylon 5: The Lost Tales
July 31, 2007
September 3, 2007
Mastering problems
The transfer of Babylon 5 from fullscreen to widescreen (originally for the Sci Fi Channel; later released on DVD) created significant problems with regard to special-effects/CGI footage. Several factors complicated the process.137
Although originally broadcast in the standard television aspect ratio of 4:3, all live-action footage was filmed on Super 35 mm film (with a ratio of 1.65:1). The idea was that, once widescreen televisions (with an aspect ratio of 16:9 or 1.78:1) became more popular, the episodes could be easily converted into a widescreen format.
CGI shots were rendered in the 4:3 ratio, but designed so that the top and bottom of each shot could be removed to create a widescreen image without ruining the image composition. For the widescreen DVD releases technical problems occurred during the progressive scan transfer and re-formatting, introducing artifacts that resulted in a picture quality of the CGI shots now inferior to the few laserdisc and other 4:3 home video releases.
While the camera negatives of the original live-action shots held the potential for high-definition digital images, the CGI shots and shots combining live-action with CGI, were stored in the much lower-definition NTSC digital format. (Again, the expectation was that it would be relatively cheap in the future to recreate the CGI in widescreen.)
Over the years, the original computer-generated models, etc., have been lost, making it necessary to use the old 4:3 CGI shots. Both Foundation Imaging and its successor, Netter Digital, have gone out of business.
This has resulted in several consistent flaws throughout the Babylon 5 widescreen release. In particular, quality drops significantly whenever a scene cuts from purely live-action to a shot combining live-action and CGI. This is particularly noticeable on the PAL DVDs, since CGI shots had to be converted from NTSC, as well as being blown up to fit a widescreen television. In addition, while the live-action film was originally widescreen, shots were composed for 4:3, resulting in a conspicuous tendency for actors to clump up in the middle of the screen.138
For these reasons, Warner Home Video is unlikely to release the series on Blu-Ray. Additionally, a Blu-Ray version of the first Lost Tales installment, Voices in the Dark, was cancelled due to poor sales.
Soundtrack releases
A total of 30 soundtrack albums have been released for Babylon 5. They are all composed by the series composer Christopher Franke and released under his own record label Sonic Images.139 These albums include 24 episode soundtracks, three film soundtracks, and three compilation albums: Babylon 5: Vol 1, Babylon 5: Vol 2, and Best of Babylon 5.
Compilation soundtracks
These include music that appeared throughout the series, but have been extensively reorchestrated, rewritten, and remixed by Franke into lengthy movements. The second full-length CD also features the main titles from seasons 1 to 4 (the main title for season 5 can be heard on the CD Best of Babylon 5, released in 2001).
Episodic and feature film soundtracks
The 27 episodic and feature film soundtracks include the exact unedited music from each corresponding episode or feature film, with no alterations, omissions, or additions.
Other releases
Seasons 1&lt;U+2013&gt;2 and parts of season 3 of Babylon 5 have been released as advertisement-supported downloads through the In2TV and Hulu download services. Additionally, every episode from seasons 1 to 5, as well as the pilot film Babylon 5: The Gathering, are available for purchase on the Xbox Live Marketplace in the United States. All 5 seasons, and 5 movies (In The Beginning,Thirdspace, River of Souls, A Call To Arms, Legend of the Rangers) are available through iTunes. All 92 television episode scripts (plus two TV film scripts) written by J. Michael Straczynski for the series are being published as a series of 15 volumes.140 Contrary to original predictions the laserdisc home video releases had the 4:3 format, and only season 1 and 5 became completely available with seasons 2 and 4 only being released fragmentary.
Games
In November 1997, Chameleon Eclectic Entertainment published the original The Babylon Project: The Roleplaying Game Based on Babylon 5.141 In 2003, Mongoose Publishing printed the Babylon 5 Roleplaying Game &amp; Factbook.142
The Babylon 5 Component Game system was also released in 1997 by 'Component Game Systems'. It was a complex political and military based game, using a number of individually purchased expansions or components, which could take up to 5 hours to play. Component Game Systems came out with a number of component game systems that used the same semi-collectible approach, and was derived from the unpublished Galactic Empires board game, based on the CCG of the same name&lt;U+2014&gt;Companion Games (Galactic Empires' publisher) became Component Game Systems in the process. The basic idea is that each player need only buy his part of the game, representing in this case a specific political entity from the Babylon 5 universe. Players sit down at the same table and combine their components to have a game. 'Component Game Systems' folded in 1999 after having released only the first two 'years' (2258 and 2259) worth of Babylon related components for the game, and even their domain name (www.c-g-s.com) has been recycled by some unrelated group.
The Babylon 5 Wars wargame was first published by Agents of Gaming in 1998. The game was developed in close contact with the creators of the show, and most of the published material is considered canon.143 Agents of Gaming later published Babylon 5 Fleet Action, which focused on battles of a larger scale. In 2004, Babylon 5: A Call to Arms was released by Mongoose Publishing. The game is similar in many ways to Babylon 5 Wars but has a more streamlined rules set and games take a lot less time to complete.
Precedence Entertainment produced the Babylon 5 Collectible Card Game between 1997 and 2000. In its original form, the game allowed for 2-4 players with each one playing one of the ambassadors to the B5 council: Sinclair, Delenn, G'Kar or Londo. Later expansions increased the maximum number of players that could play at once and expanded the players' options. Players could represent the League of Non-Aligned Worlds or could play alternative ambassadors such as Bester for the Psi Corps or Lord Refa for the Centauri. The game was discontinued after Precedence lost the license from Warner Brothers in 2000.
There are no officially licensed Babylon 5 video games on the market, though in 1998 a video game based on Babylon 5, named Into the Fire, was being developed by Yosemite Entertainment, an internal division of Sierra Entertainment. Work on this game ended on September 21, 1999, when, as part of a corporate reorganization, Sierra cancelled it and laid off its development staff when the game was only a few months away from release.144 This game was to have cast the player as the pilot of a Starfury fighter craft, giving the player an opportunity to &quot;move up through the ranks,&quot; and eventually take command of capital ships and even fleets. Christopher Franke composed and recorded new music for the game, and live action footage was filmed with the primary actors from the series.
A number of unauthorized ''Babylon 5 '' modifications have been created for other computer games such as Homeworld and Homeworld 2, as well as at least one (unlicensed) independent project to develop a standalone game. The only finished work as yet though is the free and standalone game &quot;The Babylon Project&quot; based on the FreeSpace 2 Source Code Project.145
See also
Babylon 5 influences
Index of Babylon 5 articles
Babylon 5's use of the Internet
The Be Five
List of television series that include time-travel
rec.arts.sf.tv.babylon5.moderated
The Lurker's Guide to Babylon 5
References
External links
The Lurker's Guide to Babylon 5: Babylon 5 reference and episode guide
Early Babylon 5 Designs: Information from the original 1991 promotional flyer, with different character names and Peter Ledger's artwork
bg:&lt;U+0412&gt;&lt;U+0430&gt;&lt;U+0432&gt;&lt;U+0438&gt;&lt;U+043B&gt;&lt;U+043E&gt;&lt;U+043D&gt; 5 ca:Babylon 5 cs:Babylon 5 da:Babylon 5 de:Babylon 5 et:Babylon 5 es:Babylon 5 fr:Babylon 5 gl:Babylon 5 hr:Babylon 5 it:Babylon 5 he:&lt;U+05D1&gt;&lt;U+05D1&gt;&lt;U+05D9&gt;&lt;U+05DC&gt;&lt;U+05D5&gt;&lt;U+05DF&gt; 5 hu:Babylon 5 ms:Babylon 5 nl:Babylon 5 ja:&lt;U+30D0&gt;&lt;U+30D3&gt;&lt;U+30ED&gt;&lt;U+30F3&gt;5 no:Babylon 5 nn:Babylon 5 pl:Babilon 5 pt:Babylon 5 ro:Babylon 5 ru:&lt;U+0412&gt;&lt;U+0430&gt;&lt;U+0432&gt;&lt;U+0438&gt;&lt;U+043B&gt;&lt;U+043E&gt;&lt;U+043D&gt;-5 sk:Babylon 5 fi:Babylon 5 sv:Babylon 5 tl:Babylon 5 uk:&lt;U+0412&gt;&lt;U+0430&gt;&lt;U+0432&gt;&lt;U+0438&gt;&lt;U+043B&gt;&lt;U+043E&gt;&lt;U+043D&gt; 5
  Category:First-run syndicated television programs in the United States Category:1990s American television series Category:Prime Time Entertainment Network Category:American science fiction television series Category:Serial drama television series Category:Television series by Warner Bros. Television Category:Turner Network Television shows Category:1993 American television series debuts Category:1998 television series endings Category:Space opera Category:Space adventure series
















Divided Loyalties
















Objects at Rest


&quot;Learning Curve&quot;














TV Zone, January 1998 issue
























Episode 4x21, &quot;Rising Star&quot;
























Season 5, Episode 19: The Wheel of Fire

















Graw, B. and Glass, R.: &quot;Babylon 5 Wars Second Edition Rules Compendium.&quot;, page 1. Agents of Gaming, 2000


