Ashurbanipal (; ; &quot;Ashur is creator of a heir&quot;;1 668 BC &lt;U+2013&gt; c. 627 BC),2 also spelled Assurbanipal or Ashshurbanipal, was an Assyrian king, the son of Esarhaddon and the last strong king of the Neo-Assyrian Empire (934-609 BC).3 He is famed for amassing a significant collection of cuneiform documents for his royal palace at Nineveh.4 This collection, known as the Library of Ashurbanipal, is now housed at the British Museum.
In the Bible he is called Asenappar ().5 Roman historian Justinus identified him as Sardanapalus.6
Early life
Ashurbanipal was born toward the end of a fifteen-hundred-year period of Assyrian ascendancy.7
His father, Esarhaddon, youngest son of Sennacherib, had become heir when the crown prince, Ashur-nadin-shumi, was deposed by rebels from his position as vassal for Babylon. Esarhaddon was the son not of Sennacherib's queen, Tashmetum-sharrat, but of the West Semitic &quot;palace woman&quot; Zakutu, &quot;the pure&quot; (cf. Modern Standard Arabic &lt;U+0632&gt;&lt;U+0643&gt;&lt;U+0627&gt;&lt;U+0629&gt; [zak&lt;U+0101&gt;t], &quot;that which purifies&quot;), known by her native name, Naqi'a. The only queen known for Esarhaddon was Ashur-hamat, who died in 672 BC.
Ashurbanipal grew up in the small palace called bit reduti (house of succession), built by his grandfather Sennacherib when he was crown prince in the northern quadrant of Nineveh.8 In 694 BC, Sennacherib had completed the &quot;Palace Without Rival&quot; at the southwest corner of the acropolis, obliterating most of the older structures. The &quot;House of Succession&quot; had become the palace of Esarhaddon, the crown prince. In this house, Ashurbanipal's grandfather was assassinated by uncles identified only from the biblical account as Adrammelek and Sharezer. From this conspiracy, Esarhaddon emerged as king in 680 BC He proceeded to rebuild as his residence the bit masharti (weapons house, or arsenal). The &quot;House of Succession&quot; was left to his mother and the younger children, including Ashurbanipal.
The names of five brothers and one sister are known.9 Sin-iddin-apli, the intended crown prince, died prior to 672 BC. Not having been expected to become heir to the throne, Ashurbanipal was trained in scholarly pursuits as well as the usual horsemanship, hunting, chariotry, soldierliness, craftsmanship, and royal decorum. In a unique autobiographical statement, Ashurbanipal specified his youthful scholarly pursuits as having included oil divination, mathematics, and reading and writing. According to legend, Ashurbanipal was the only Assyrian king who learned how to read and write.
Royal succession
In 672, upon the death of his queen, Esarhaddon reorganized the line of succession at the instigation of his mother. He used the submission of Median chieftains to draft the &quot;Vassal Treaty&quot;.10 The chieftains swore that if Esarhaddon died while his sons were still minors, they and their children would guarantee the succession of Ashurbanipal as king of Assyria and Shamash-shum-ukin as king of Babylon even though Ashurbanipal was the younger of the two. Before this, his elder brother Sin-iddin-apli was Esarhaddon's heir but he died in the same year. A monumental stela set up two years later in a northwestern province portrays Esarhaddon in high relief upon its face and each of the sons on a side. These portraits, the earliest dated for Ashurbanipal and his brother, show both with a facial beard which implies maturity.
The princes pursued diverse educations thereafter. Extant letters from Shamash-shum-ukin offer his father reports of the situation in Babylon; Ashurbanipal at home received letters as crown prince. The situation came to an immediate crisis in 669, when Esarhaddon, while travelling to reinvade Egypt,11 died suddenly. Ashurbanipal did not accede to the kingship of Assyria until late in the year. His grandmother Zakutu required all to support his sole claim to the throne and to report acts of treason from now on to him and herself. This shows how influential she was at the beginning of Ashurbanipal's reign. The official ceremonies of coronation came in the second month of the new year, and within the same year (668 BC), Ashurbanipal installed his brother as King of Babylon. The transition took place smoothly, and the dual monarchy of the youthful brothers began. Texts describe their relationship as if they were twins. It was clear, however, that Ashurbanipal, as king of Assyria, like his fathers before him, was also called &quot;king of the universe&quot;.
Military accomplishments
Despite being a popular king among his subjects, he was also known by for his cruelty to his enemies. Some pictures depict him putting a dog chain through the jaw of a defeated king and then making him live in a dog kennel.12 Many paintings of the period exhibit his brutality.
Ashurbanipal inherited from Esarhaddon not only the throne but also the ongoing war with Egypt and Kush/Nubia. Ashurbanipal sent an army against them in 667 BC that defeated the Nubian king of Egypt Taharqa, near Memphis, while Ashurbanipal stayed at his capital in Nineveh. At the same time the Egyptian vassals rebelled and were also defeated. All of the vanquished leaders save one were sent to Nineveh. Only Necho I, the native Egyptian Prince of Sais, convinced the Assyrians of his loyalty and was sent back to become the Assyrian puppet Pharaoh of Egypt. After the death of Taharqa in 664 BC his nephew and successor Tantamani invaded Upper Egypt and made Thebes his capital. In Memphis he defeated the other Egyptian princes and Necho may have died in the battle. Another army was sent by Ashurbanipal and again it succeeded in defeating the Kushites/Nubians. Tantamani was driven back to his homeland in Nubia and stayed there. The Assyrians plundered Thebes and took much booty home with them. How the Assyrian interference in Egypt ended is not certain but Necho's son Psammetichus I gained independence while keeping his relations with Assyria friendly. An Assyrian royal inscription tells how the Lydian king Gyges received dreams from the Assyrian god Ashur. The dreams told him that when he submitted to Ashurbanipal he would conquer his foes. After he sent his ambassadors to do so he was defeated his Cimmerian enemies. But when he supported the rebellion of one of the Egyptian rebels his country was overrun by the Cilicians.13
Assyria was by then master of the largest empire the world had yet seen, stretching from The Caucasus in the north to North Africa in the south, and from the east Mediterranean in the west to central Iran in the east. Ashurbanipal enjoyed the subjugation of Babylon, Chaldea, Media, Persia, Egypt, Parthia, Elam, Gutium, Phrygia, Mannea, Corduene, Aramea, Urartu, Lydia, Cilicia, Commagene, Caria, Phoenicia, Israel, Judah, Samarra, Moab, Edom, Nabatea, Arabia, the Neo-Hittites, Dilmun, Nubia, Scythia, Cimmeria, Armenia and Cyprus, with few problems during Ashurbanipal's reign. For the time being, the dual monarchy in Mesopotamia went well.14
For his assignment of his brother, Ashurbanipal sent a statue of the divinity Marduk with him as sign of good will.15 Shamash-shuma-ukin's power was limited. He performed Babylonian rituals but the official building projects were still executed by his younger brother. During his first years Elam was still in peace as it was under his father. Ashurbanipal sent food supplies during a famine. Around 664 BC the situation changed and Urtaku, the Elamite king, attacked Babylonia by surprise. Assyria delayed in sending aid to Babylon. This could have been caused for two reasons: either the soothing messages of Elamite ambassadors or Ashurbanipal might simply not have been present at that time. Elamites retreated before the Assyrian troops, and in the same year Urtaku died. He was succeeded by Teumman (Tempti-Khumma-In-Shushinak) who was not his legitimate heir, so many Elamite princes had to flee to Ashurbanipal's court, including Urtaku's oldest son Humban-nikash. In 658/657 BC the two empires clashed again, when the province of Gambulu in 664 rebelled against the Assyrians and Ashurbanipal decided to punish them. On the other hand, Teumman saw his authority threatened by the Elamite princes at the Assyrian court and demanded their extradition. The Assyrian forces invaded Elam and fought a battle at the Ulaya river.16
Elam was defeated in the battle in which, according to Assyrian reliefs, Teumman committed suicide.17 Ashurbanipal installed Humban-nikash as king of Madaktu and another prince, Tammaritu, as king of the city Hidalu. Elam was considered a new vassal of Assyria and tribute was imposed on it. With the Elamite problem solved the Assyrians could finally punish Gumbulu and seized its capital. Then the victorious army marched home taking with them the head of Teumman. In Nineveh, when the Elamite ambassadors saw the head, one tore out his beard and the other committed suicide. As further humiliation the head of the Elamite king was put on display at the port of Nineveh. The death and head of Teumman was depicted multiple times in the reliefs of Ashurbanipal's palace.18
Friction grew between the two brother kings and in 652 BC Babylon rebelled. This time Babylon was not alone &lt;U+2013&gt; it had allied itself with a host of peoples resentful of Assyrian rule, including Chaldean and Aramean tribes dwelling in its southern regions, the kings of &quot;Gutium&quot;, Amurru, and Meluhha, the Arabs and Nabateans dwelling in the Arabian Peninsula, and even Elam. According to a later Aramaic tale on Papyrus 63, Shamash-shum-ukin formally declared war on Ashurbanipal in a letter where he claims that his brother is only the governor of Nineveh and his subject.19Again the Assyrians delayed an answer, this time due to unfavourable omens. It's not certain how the rebellion affected the Assyrian heartlands but there was some unrest in the cities.20 When Babylon finally was attacked, the Assyrians were victorious. Civil war prevented further military aid, and in 648 BC Borsippa and Babylon were besieged. Without aid the situation was hopeless. After two years Shamash-shum-ukin met his end in his burning palace just before the city surrendered. This time Babylon was not destroyed, as under Sennacherib, but a massacre of the rebels took place, according to the king's inscriptions. Ashurbanipal allowed Babylon to keep its semi autonomous position, but it became more formalized than before. The next king Kandalanu (an Assyrian governor) left no official inscription, probably as his function was only ritual.21
The end of the Assyrian Empire
During the final decade of Ashurbanipal's rule, Assyria was peaceful, but the country apparently faced an underlying decline due to over-expansion, the lack of funds from its devastated colonies, and insufficient troops to govern its vast empire. Documentation from the last years of Ashurbanipal's reign is scarce. The last attestations of Ashurbanipal's reign are of his year 38 (631 BC), but according to later sources he reigned for 42 years (627 BC).22
After Ashurbanipal's death in 627 BC he was succeeded by Ashur-etil-ilani (626 - 623 BC). However, Assyria soon descended into civil wars that would ultimately lead to its downfall. Ashur-etil-ilani, was deposed as ruler of the empire in 623 BC by a general named Sin-shumu-lishir who was also declared king of Babylon. His brother Sinsharishkun deposed the usurper in 622 BC, but was beset by a series of crippling civil wars against his rule in Assyria itself. During his rule the Assyrian Empire began to unravel, with subject peoples ceasing to pay tribute. Babylonia took advantage of the anarchy in Assyria and rebelled under Nabopolassar who claimed the throne in 620 BC, and the next four years saw Sinshariskun encamped in Babylonia trying to unseat Nabopolassar whilst trying to quell wholesale rebellion in the Assyrian heartland. The anarchic state in Mesopotamia weakened Assyria to such a degree that it was able to be destroyed in a war that lasted between 616 BC and 605 BC, by an alliance of Babylonians, Chaldeans, Medes, Persians, Scythians and Cimmerians.
Art and culture
 Ashurbanipal was proud of his scribal education. He asserts this in the statement: &lt;U+201C&gt;I Assurbanipal within [the palace], took care of the wisdom of Nebo, the whole of the inscribed tablets, of all the clay tablets, the whole of their mysteries and difficulties, I solved.&lt;U+201D&gt;.23 He was one of the few kings who could read the cuneiform script in Akkadian and Sumerian, and claimed that he even read texts from before the great flood. He was also able to solve mathematical problems. During his reign he collected cuneiform texts from all over Mesopotamia, and especially Babylonia, in the library of Nineveh.24
Nineveh was the capital city of Assyria from the 9th-7th centuries BC, but had been destroyed in 612 BC. Ashurbanipal&lt;U+2019&gt;s palace in the Nineveh was re-excavated in December 1853. The library was discovered in the Lion-Hunt Room (Murray, 2009).25 The Library of Ashurbanipal at Nineveh is perhaps the most compelling discovery in the Ancient Near East. There have been over 30,000 clay tablets uncovered in Ashurbanipal&lt;U+2019&gt;s library,26 providing archaeologists with an amazing wealth of Mesopotamian literary, religious and administrative work. Those clay tablets were written in cuneiform, which derives from the Latin word &lt;U+201C&gt;cunea&lt;U+201D&gt; which means &lt;U+201C&gt;wedge&lt;U+201D&gt; in English, because it is created by making wedges on clay tablets. The Assurbanipal Library in Nineveh was a royal library, and the first library to classify their collection according to genres. Four-sided tablets were utilized for financial transactions and two-sided clay tablets were reserved for agricultural records (Murray, 2009).27 Among the findings was the Enuma Elish, also known as the Epic of Creation,28 which depicts a traditional Babylonian view of creation where the god Marduk slays Tiamat, the personification of salt water, and creates the world from her body. In this particular version, man is created from the blood of a revolting god, Qingu, in order to toil on behalf of the gods. Also found in Nineveh, The Epic of Gilgamesh29 is a compelling account of the hero and his friend Enkidu seeking out to destroy the demon Humbaba. The Gods punish the pair for their arrogance, however, by having Enkidu die from illness. After Enkidu&lt;U+2019&gt;s death Gilgamesh seeks Utnapishtim, the survivor of the Deluge, in order to find out the secret of immortality.
The library also included hymns and prayers, medical, mathematical, ritual, divinatory and astrological texts, alongside all sorts of administrative documents, letters and contracts. The discovery of these tablets in 1853 by Hormuzd Rassam (himself an Assyrian) provided the modern world its first detailed glimpse of the languages and literature of ancient Mesopotamia (Murray, 2009).30 Ashurbanipal had a fascination with the past, and during his forty-two year reign he sponsored the collection and copying of older texts for his library at Neneveh.31
Aside from the many other myths found in Nineveh, a large selection of &lt;U+201C&gt;omen texts&lt;U+201D&gt; has been excavated and deciphered. Marc Van de Mieroop points out the Enuma Anu Enlil was a popular text among them: &lt;U+201C&gt;It contained omens dealing with the moon, its visibility, eclipses, and conjunction with planets and fixed stars, the sun, its corona, spots, and eclipses, the weather, namely lightning, thunder, and clouds, and the planets and their visibility, appearance, and stations.&lt;U+201D&gt;32
Other genres found during excavations included standard lists used by scribes and scholars, word lists, bilingual vocabularies, lists of signs and synonyms, lists of medical diagnoses, astronomic/astrological texts. The scribal texts proved to be very helpful in deciphering cuneiform.33
All of these texts shed some light on the religious beliefs surrounding Mesopotamian and Assyrian belief, but the library also can be interpreted as a manifestation of the value Ashurbanipal must have had for the preservation of Mesopotamian literature and culture.
The British Museum in London boasts an exhilarating exhibit of carvings from the North Palace of Ashurbanipal, also excavated at Nineveh, depicting the king hunting and killing lions. In Assyria, the lion hunt was seen as a royal sport; the depictions were seen as a symbol of the king&lt;U+2019&gt;s ability to guard the nation.34 The &lt;U+201C&gt;Garden Party&lt;U+201D&gt; relief shows the king and his queen having a banquet celebrating the Assyrian triumph over Tuemman in the campaign against Elam. The fine carvings serve as testimony to Ashurbanipal&lt;U+2019&gt;s high regard for art, but also communicate an important message meant to be passed down for posterity.35
The sculptor Fred Parhad (1934-) created a larger-than-life statue of Ashurbanipal, which was placed on a street near the San Francisco City Hall main square in 1988.3637 The sculpture shows Asurbanipal wearing a short tunic and holds a lion cub in his proper right arm. The figure stands on a concrete base, with bronze plaque and rosettes. The statue stands across from City Hall next to the Asian Art Museum and faces the San Francisco Library.
Robert E. Howard wrote a short story entitled &quot;The Fire of Asshurbanipal&quot; (sic), first published in the December 1936 issue of Weird Tales magazine, about an &quot;accursed jewel belonging to a king of long ago, whom the Grecians called Sardanapalus and the Semitic peoples Asshurbanipal&quot;.38
Murray, S. (2009). The Library: An Illustrated History. New York, NY: Skyhorse Pub. Chicago: ALA Editions.
See also
Kings of Assyria
References and footnotes
Sources
External links
Ashurbanipal
The Library of King Ashurbanipal Web Page
Assurbanipal Coronation Hymn
History Of Assurbanipal, Translated from the Cuneiform Inscriptions by George Smith
Historical Prism Inscriptions of Ashurbanipal I: Editions E, B1-5, D, and K - Oriental Institute
Geldings for the Gods
Category:Assyrian kings Category:685 BC births Category:627 BC deaths Category:7th-century BC rulers in Asia Category:Fertile Crescent
Dictionary of the Ancient Near East, Editors Piotr Bienkowski and Alan Millard, p. 36↩
These are the dates according to the Assyrian King list, Assyrian kinglist↩
Ashurbanipal from the Encyclop&lt;U+00E6&gt;dia Britannica↩
See other versions at ↩
↩
↩
: &lt;U+201C&gt;&lt;U+2026&gt; Esarhaddon imposes oaths to respect the right to succession of his two sons upon various peoples: the Medes in the Vassal Treaties and probably the people of Sippar in Text 3.&lt;U+201D&gt;↩
↩
↩
Georges Roux - Ancient Iraq↩
↩
This is the name according to Assyrian sources; the river is today identified with either the Karkheh or Karun.↩
↩
↩
Steiner and Ninms, RB 92 1985↩
↩
↩
Most important examples are the Harran inscription and the Uruk king list.↩
Cylinder A, Column I, Lines 31-33, in Smith, George. History of Assurbanipal, Translated from the Cuneiform Inscriptions. London: Harrison and Sons, 1871: pg.6↩
↩
↩
http://www.britishmuseum.org/research/research_projects/ashurbanipal_library_phase_1.aspx &quot;Assurbanipal Library Phase 1&quot;, British Museum One↩
Epic of Creation in Dalley, Stephanie. Myths from Mesopotamia. Oxford, 1989: pg.233-81↩
Epic of Gilgamesh in Dalley, Stephanie. Myths from Mesopotamia. Oxford, 1989: pg.50-135↩
↩
↩
&quot;Assyria: Lion Hunt (Room 10a).&lt;U+201D&gt; British Museum.↩
&lt;U+201C&gt;'Garden Party' relief from the North Palace of Ashurbanipal (Room S),&lt;U+201D&gt;. British Museum.↩
Smithsonian Art Inventories Catalog - Ashurbanipal, (sculpture)↩
Ashurbanipal Statue at the Main San Francisco Library in San Francisco↩
Price, R. M. (ed.): Nameless Cults: The Cthulhu Mythos Fiction of Robert E. Howard, Chaosium (2001), pp. 99 - 118.↩
