'''Heart 96.3 ''' (formerly GWR FM Bristol) is a radio station serving Bristol and surrounding areas and broadcasting on 96.3 MHz in Bristol and Weston-super-Mare. Launched in 1981 as Radio West, it was merged with neighbouring Wiltshire Radio and relaunched under the name GWR in 1985, retaining the name through several changes of ownership until rebranding in March 2009. Heart Bristol merged with sister stations in Somerset and Bath to form Heart West Country.
History
Radio West
Radio West began broadcasting on Tuesday 27 October 1981, eleven years after the region's first local radio station BBC Radio Bristol launched. The station started a full service commercial radio station on 96.3 MHz FM and 1260 kHz AM (238 metres medium wave) - the culmination of a merger between two companies bidding for the Bristol and Bath radio licence (Radio Avonside and Bristol Channel) awarded by the then Independent Broadcasting Authority. The choice of on-air name proved to be simple when the BBC aired a series called Shoestring complete with the fictitious Radio West.1
Radio West's cost base was large due to the extravagant studio premises that had been purchased at The Waterside in Bristol, and the lack of audience led to disastrous advertising revenue and losses of &lt;U+00A3&gt;300,000 by 1983. John Bradford, who had helped found Mercia Sound in Coventry, joined the station in 1983. Alongside programme controller Dave Cash (ex Capital Radio) (also the first voice heard on the station), Nino Firetto (the station's first breakfast presenter), Johnnie Walker (ex Caroline, BBC) and Roger Day (ex Caroline, Piccadilly, and latterly BRMB) were brought in, but to no avail. The station still slipped and programmes had to be curtailed in October 1983. The station closed down each evening at 7:30pm, while resources were concentrated on daytime output. After more fine tuning of the station's output, Radio West became more mainstream and by late 1984, the prospects were more promising with the return of evening and late night output keeping the station on air until 1am (midnight on Sundays).
Although the station was broadcasting programmes of a high quality (including award-nominated computer show Datarama),2 listeners remained loyal to the BBC's Radio Bristol, already established as the radio station for the area.
Financially commercial radio struggled to make any money as the 1980s economy in Britain was hampered by union strikes. Radio West had not made any profit since it started and looked set to close, when the neighbouring local station Wiltshire Radio, based in Swindon made an approach to merge the two stations, creating a station covering from Weston-super-Mare in the west to Swindon and Hungerford in the east, with opt out programming for the two areas. This merger was approved by the government and was completed in September 1985.3
Some of the 1980s DJs included Dave Glass, Trevor Fry, Bryan Chalker, John Hayes, Dave Barrett, Dave Bowen, Mark Seaman, Andy Westgate, Alan Roberts, Gary Vincent, Steve Orchard, Sandy Martin, Keith Francis, David Hamilton, Andy Henly and a returning Johnnie Walker.
GWR launch
Radio West formally closed at just after midnight on Monday 9 September 1985 with a special final programme hosted by Trevor Fry and the final closedown announcement from Mark Seaman (the station's programme organiser). Test transmissions for GWR commenced the next day before it launched as a 24-hour full service station at 6am on Monday 1 October 1985.
The new station aired separate output for Bristol and Wiltshire at breakfast, mid-morning, afternoons and drive time - an opt-out service for West Wiltshire was also introduced but closed after just a few weeks. New disc jockeys were brought in, however the station still sounded like competitor Radio Bristol with its mix of music, news and talk (as was the trend in British commercial radio at the time due to needletime restrictions) and listening figures were not improving.
Split services
GWR Radio began splitting frequencies as required by the government - which declared its desire to end simulcasting on both FM and AM. GWR Radio launched Brunel Radio on 15 November 1988, a &quot;golden oldies&quot; station on 1260 kHz in Bristol, and 936/1161 kHz AM in Wiltshire. In the early 1990s Brunel started networking programming to 2CR Radio in Bournemouth and Radio 210 in Reading, Berkshire. Each station had Classic Gold appended to the end of their names (e.g. Brunel Classic Gold, 210 Classic Gold). Local news and shows were combined with networked programmes in each of its areas.
After the lifting on sanctions restricting the time spent playing music (so-called 'needle time') in 1988, GWR FM became more and more music-led, playing Top 40 chart music during the daytime, and specialist music (big band music, rock, rap etc.) was gradually phased out. The local element of the station, especially its news coverage, had progressively become briefer and reduced in length, then moved onto Brunel Classic Gold, before being dropped altogether. GWR FM at last become popular, with the rise in listening figures confirming this.
A Bath ILR licence was awarded by the IBA in 1986. GWR Radio Bath debuted on 22 May 1987, as a separate station, later known as Bath's GWR FM and Heart Bath. Although there was still some programming being shared from GWR Bristol, local output was put out during peak listening hours. However for official licensing purposes, GWR Bath and Bristol were listed as one station and audience figures from RAJAR were combined with GWR Swindon. All programming for Heart Bath were broadcast from Bristol, but there was a small 'GWR Bath' office in Avon Street at one time.
The Mix Network
In 1992, a re-launch of the station saw The New GWR-FM become the hub of what was The Mix Network, a network of radio stations owned by the GWR Group (formerly GCap Media) covering southern England and Wales. The radio station's (and the group's) long held philosophy of heavily researching the average person's listening habits and tastes led by group chairman Ralph Bernard created a tightly formatted sound where popular Top 40 chart hits ex-Top 40 songs are blended in with older hits. This led to a Better Music Mix format which spread to other radio stations within the GWR Group, including Essex FM, Trent FM and Beacon Radio creating a mini national network.
The practice for the Mix Network stations was for each station to play a centrally produced playlist (from GWR FM itself). Songs were broadcast at the same time as neighbouring group stations and each station adopted the Better Music Mix tagline, to be said by local disc jockeys in between songs. Fans of the previous guises of some stations bought by the GWR Group, notably Essex FM and Beacon Radio were unhappy at the sudden re-branding of the stations, accusing the new management of reducing local output such as news bulletins and replacing local programming with networked shows such as Late Night Love and The Request Fest, which originated from the Bristol studios.
Despite protests from outside Bristol, GWR FM continued to be popular with RAJAR listening figures showing an average 14% listening share of all radio broadcast in the area.4
Licence renewal
In 2002 the Radio Authority renewed GWR FM's licence. It was due to expire in October 2009, but will now expire on 28 October 2013, according to GWR FM licensees page.5 However it is expected to be automatically renewed because it provides a DAB simulcast signal. This is the same scenario applies to its sister stations GWR FM Bath and Classic Gold 1260.
Weston-super-Mare relay
In late 2007, GWR FM launched a relay of their Bristol service to the Weston-super-Mare area on 103.0 MHz FM, as for many years Weston had been officially covered by the station, but had suffered from a poor 96.3 MHz FM signal in many parts of the town. The programming on this relay was identical to the Bristol service, aside from jingles and sweepers that stated 'GWR Weston', and had separate advertisements for North Somerset listeners. This led to the somewhat confusing situation that although the station branding said 'GWR Weston', all DJ links reference 'GWR Bristol' and feature Bristol oriented news, event guides and competitions.
Ofcom yellow card
On 13 March 2009, Ofcom issued GWR Bristol with a &quot;yellow card&quot; after a content sampling report showed that only 47% of GWR Bristol's music was from the past 2 years, much lower than its minimum 75%.67 Ofcom are now planning to monitor the station again soon after its rebrand to Heart.
Network restructuring
On 21 June 2010, Global Radio announced plans to merge Heart Bristol with Heart Somerset and Heart Bath as part of plans to reduce the Heart network of stations from 33 to 16.8 The new station, Heart West Country, began broadcasting from Bristol on 16 July 2010.9
Slogans
1982 Radio West- &quot;We got a good thing going&quot;
1985 GWR- &quot;Listen, we're talking about you!&quot;
1989 GWR Radio &quot;The West number one&quot;, &quot;Good Music, Great Talk&quot;
1992 The New GWR FM- &quot;No rap, less chat&quot;
1994 &quot;A mix of the 70s, 80s and the best of today&quot;
1995 &quot;A better music mix - from the 70s, 80s and today&quot;
1997 &quot;Today's better music mix&quot;
2000 &quot;Today's best mix, today's best variety&quot; &quot;More music, less talk&quot; &quot;From the world's best city&quot;
2005/6 &quot;Good Music is Back&quot;
2007 &quot;Today's Best Mix&quot;
2008 &quot;More Music Variety&quot;
2009 &quot;The Heart of Bristol&quot;
2009 &quot;Heart is Coming&quot;
2009 &quot;More Music Variety&quot;
GWR acronym
The initials GWR have an association with the Great Western Railway especially in the South West of England, and there is a popular misconception with listeners that the station stands for Great Western Radio. Indeed neighbouring GWR Wiltshire was called Wiltshire Radio (WR) before its merger with Radio West. However according to group management, the letters GWR did not stand for anything.
It should also be noted that GWR's oldies service was originally called Brunel Classic Gold, after the Great Western Railway's founding father Isambard Kingdom Brunel.
GWR Group
The company which formerly owned GWR, the GWR Group, expanded from the late 1980s / early 1990s onwards to purchase other stations throughout the country. Many UK stations now follow the GWR format. It became the largest radio company in the UK, before merging with its competitor Capital Radio to become GCap Media on 9 May 2005.
Past and previous management
Chairman: Stella Pirie
Programme Controller
1994-1995: Steve Orchard (former GCap Media Local Operations Director)
1995-1997: Dirk Anthony (former GCap Media Group Programme Director)
1997-1998: Vaughan Hobbs
1998-2000: Mark Beever
2000&lt;U+2013&gt;present: Paul Andrew
Managing Director
2007&lt;U+2013&gt;present: Steve Jones
Premises
1982-2001: Watershed Centre, Canons Road, Bristol
2001&lt;U+2013&gt;present: Passage Street, Bristol (also houses Classic Gold 1260, Heart Bath and Chill)
See also
Heart Network
Heart Bath
Heart Gloucestershire
Heart Wiltshire
References
The Radio Companion by Paul Donovan, ISBN 978-0-586-09012-1
Commercial Radio Pocket Book by Commercial Radio Companies Association
Radio Authority Pocket Book 1992-2003 by the Radio Authority
Transdiffusion http://www.transdiffusion.org
Category:Bath and North East Somerset Category:Organisations based in Bristol Category:Radio stations in Bristol Category:Culture in Somerset Category:South Gloucestershire Category:Radio stations established in 1981 Bristol Category:Defunct radio stations in the United Kingdom
↩
↩
↩
↩
OFCOM UK Radio Licenses - Analogue: GWR FM (Bristol &amp; Bath)↩
↩
↩
Global Radio to halve number of local Heart stations, mediaguardian.co.uk, 21 June 2010↩
Heart slims but strengthens, RadioToday, 21 June 2010↩
