Oru Second Class Yathra is a 2015 Malayalam comedy thriller written &amp; directed by Jexson Antony &amp; Rejis Antony.12345
Plot
Police officers Balagopal (Sreejith Ravi) and Jolly Kurien (Joju George) are under orders to transfer two prisoners from Kannur to Trivandrum. They board the Parasuram express with the handcuffed inmates. While at the Kayamkulam station, prisoner Nandu (Vineeth Sreenivasan) escapes. The two officers get off the train at the next stop with second inmate Maran (Chemban Vinod Jose) and hope to find the missing Nandu before the day ends.
Cast
Vineeth Sreenivasan as Nandu
Nikki Galrani
Chemban Vinod Jose as Maran
Nedumudi Venu
Sreejith Ravi as Balagopal
Joju George as Jolly Kurien
Citical response
The film was not panned, but did not meet expectations. The Times of India wrote that the film &quot;has a promising premise, but ends up being just half of what it aspires to be.&quot;6
Now Running wrote that while not a damaging film, it was not offensive. With most of the film's scenes shot inside a train, the film is &quot;more of a road movie in the sense that the action which starts at the northern tip of Kerala culminates at the southern end, with the rest of the passengers turning out to be characters who intend to make some impact on the narrative.&quot;7
International Business Times wrote that despite the positive buzz created before release, the film &quot;fails to come out as a comedy suspense thriller as it was supposed to be&quot;.8 The director duo of Jexon Antony and Rejis Antony adopted a flash-back narrative, but &quot;unfortunately the suspense elements went amiss, especially in the second half.&quot;9 The first portion of the film offered promises which failed during its second half.10
Indiaglitz felt it was presented in a sedate pace contrary to expectations for a thriller film. the first half of the film was as hoped for, but disappointed in its flagging in its second half. It was felt that directors Jexson and Rejis Anthony did &quot;okay on their first outing and a more polished movie is expected from them in future.&quot;11 The projects cinematography by Vinod Illampally was praised, but as is quite good. Since thrillers require a greater punching up during post-production, &quot;the editing seems a bit lax.&quot;12 The background score was fine, but in considering Gopi Sunder&lt;U+2019&gt;s body of work, it could have been better. They summarized, writing the film &quot;has a novel theme, yet the execution could have been better. A bit more taut and crisp, with its first half- like narration in the second half too could have taken the movie far ahead. It is not a bad attempt and is very much a family movie and the subject of rape of a different nature is very relevant. Watch it without much expectation and you might be pleasantly surprised.13
References
External links
Oru Second Class Yathra at the Internet Movie Database
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
