Cameron John-Ngaue Stephenson (born June 18, 1983 in Sydney, Australia) is an American football guard for the Jacksonville Jaguars of the National Football League. He was drafted by the Pittsburgh Steelers in the fifth round of the 2007 NFL Draft. He played college football at Rutgers.
Stephenson has also been a member of the Green Bay Packers, Philadelphia Eagles and New Orleans Saints.
Early years
As a young man Stephenson attended Hawthorne High School. At Hawthorne, he lettered three times in football as the team's starting left offensive tackle and also played defensive tackle and had 86 tackles/13.5 sacks in two years, earning All-Bay League honors in each season at offensive tackle and 2 time all CIF, 1st team Daily breeze, 1st team L.A. Times.
College career
He spent the 2002-03 seasons at Los Angeles Harbor College. At Harbor College, he started at defensive tackle for the Seahawks in 2002, 78 tackles/ 9.5 sacks/ 29 QB hits, earning All-South Coast Conference second-team and all-state honors. He had one major injury in his career in 2003, when he missed the rest of the season after suffering a knee injury in the season opener vs. Saddleback College. 4 tackles /2.5 sacks to end his junior college career. Became a highly-touted prospect and turning down several high profile college football powers for Rutgers.
After graduating junior college, he accepted a scholarship to attend Rutgers University, switching between offensive and defensive line before settling in as a starter at right guard in 2006. At defensive line 28 tackles/ 4.5 sacks/ 8 TFL, senior year earned 2nd team all Big East, and was ranked top 10 in the nation at guard entering the draft.
Professional career
Pittsburgh Steelers
Cameron Stephenson entered the NFL as a fifth-round pick (156th overall) of the Pittsburgh Steelers in the 2007 NFL Draft.1 However, he failed to make the team out of training camp and was released prior to the regular season.
Green Bay Packers
On 11 September 2007, Stephenson was signed to the Green Bay Packers' practice squad.2. He was re-signed in the 2008 offseason, only to be waived on July 23.
Philadelphia Eagles
Stephenson was claimed on waivers by the Eagles on 25 July 2008. He was waived by the Eagles on August 23, 2008.
New Orleans Saints
Stephenson was a member of the Saints' practice squad until he was signed by the Jaguars.
Jacksonville Jaguars
Stephenson was signed by Jacksonville Jaguars on December 16, 2008 when defensive tackle Tony McDaniel went on injured reserve. After spending the 2009 season on the practice squad, Stephenson was re-signed to a future contract on January 5, 2010.
References
External links
Jacksonville Jaguars bio
Category:1983 births Category:Living people Category:American people of Tongan descent Category:American people of Australian descent Category:People from Sydney Category:Tongan players of American football Category:Australian players of American football Category:American football offensive guards Category:American football centers Category:Rutgers Scarlet Knights football players Category:Pittsburgh Steelers players Category:Green Bay Packers players Category:Philadelphia Eagles players Category:New Orleans Saints players Category:Jacksonville Jaguars players
Official site of the Pittsburgh Steelers - Article↩
Packers.com &lt;U+00BB&gt; News &lt;U+00BB&gt; Press Releases &lt;U+00BB&gt; September 11, 2007: Packers Sign QB Bell, G Stephenson To Practice Squad↩
