is a fictional character in the anime series Tenchi Muyo! GXP: Galaxy Police Transporter.
Background
Originally the galaxy's greatest supermodel, Amane Kaunaq felt disgusted and burned-out from it and left the business to become part of the Galaxy Police. She was very good at her job (even earning the nickname &quot;the Zero Goddess&quot; because of her avoidance of pirate encounters). Amane was in line to gain a promotion to Detective 1st class when, after landing her spaceship in the lake outside Tenchi Masaki's home, she gave Seina Yamada an application to the G.P. Academy. Previously, in episode 18 of the third Tenchi OVA, she had contacted Tenchi, through her friend Mihoshi Kuramitsu, about his entering the G.P. Academy. When she saved Seina from drowning, she had assumed that Tenchi was training Seina, and gave the boy an application to the Academy as well, forgetting a regulation that prohibits citizens of underdeveloped planets from entering.
As a result of her mistake, Amane's promotion was placed on hold and she ended up assigned as an instructor in the G.P. Academy, along with Kiriko Masaki and her old childhood friend (and lovesick puppy) Seiryo Tennan. After Seina would receive the body enhancing modifications he needed to keep up with the other students, Seina moved into Amane's private home, along with Kiriko and Erma (secretly, Erma was in fact the space pirate Ryoko Balta, who was spying on Seina).
Amane's life would soon be revolving around Seina as the G.P. utilizes the boy's fantastic amount of bad luck, which seems to attract space pirates, in a plan to bring peace throughout the galaxy.
Family connections
Amane's family happens to be one of the premiere fashion houses in the galaxy. Amane mostly entered the Galaxy Police to spite her tradition-bound father, who still kept in contact with his daughter despite her entry into the G.P.. Amane, later on, would briefly re-enter the modeling business when her family sponsored a G.P. fashion show. It was only after seeing Amane's skill and abilities during a live-fire demonstration of the latest G.P. battle gear that Amane's father conceded that his daughter had made the right choice... but still held out she would return to modeling.
Amane's family is also friends of the powerful Kuramitsu family of planet Seniwa, and Amane is acquainted with both Mihoshi and her brother Misao Kuramitsu. In fact, Amane had trained Misao, and she still refers to the boy as &quot;Rookie&quot;.
Category:Adventure anime and manga Category:Anime of the 2000s Category:Comedy anime and manga Category:Harem anime and manga Category:Romance anime and manga Category:Science fiction anime and manga Category:Tenchi Muyo! characters Category:Japanese anime and manga characters
