Cardinal Gibbons High School (CGHS) is a private coeducational college-preparatory Catholic high school in Raleigh, North Carolina. Cardinal Gibbons and St. Thomas More Academy are the only Catholic high schools in Raleigh, and two of three high schools in the Diocese.
Cardinal Gibbons was founded in 1909 and has an enrollment of about 1,225 students. There are 79 faculty members, 70 percent of whom possess at least a master's degree or higher. Nearly all graduates go on to attend colleges and universities.
The school is a member of the National Catholic Educational Association, the North Carolina High School Athletic Association, and the North Carolina Association of Independent Schools. Jason D. Curtis is the principal.
History
Cardinal Gibbons was originally called Sacred Heart High School, and was the first Roman Catholic High School in Raleigh, North Carolina. The school was originally at the Pulaski Cowper mansion, which was later transformed into Sacred Heart Cathedral, the smallest cathedral in the continental United States. The school was later named &quot;Cathedral Latin High School.&quot; In 1962 a new school building opened on Western Blvd in Raleigh and school was renamed &quot;Cardinal Gibbons Memorial High School.&quot; Cathedral School still exists as an elementary and middle school which feeds into Cardinal Gibbons High. The school currently occupies a campus on Edwards Mill Rd. which was completed in 1999. 1
Feeder schools
Cardinal Gibbons High School draws most of its enrollment from the surrounding Roman Catholic lower schools in the Wake County area. These are:
Cathedral School, Raleigh
The Franciscan School, Raleigh
St. Mary Magdalene Catholic School, Apex
St. Michael the Archangel Catholic School, Cary
Our Lady of Lourdes Catholic School, Raleigh
St. Raphael the Archangel Catholic School, Raleigh
St. Thomas More Catholic School, Chapel Hill
Immaculata Catholic School, Durham
St. Catherine of Siena Catholic School, Wake Forest
Athletics
Boys sports: Baseball, Basketball, Cross Country, Football, Golf, Lacrosse, Soccer, Swimming, Tennis, Track &amp; Field, Wrestling
Girls sports: Basketball, Cheerleading, Cross Country, Dance Team, Golf, Lacrosse, Soccer, Softball, Swimming, Tennis, Track &amp; Field, Volleyball
Cardinal Gibbons High School's Athletic Department has seen many successes, with State Championships in over 9 of the men's and women's sports. Since 1998, the volleyball team has appeared in 13 consecutive State final matches, winning 11 of 13 State Championship titles. Mens Soccer team have been the winners of the 2A State Championship from 2006&lt;U+2013&gt;2008 and won the 3A State Title in 2010. The Cheerleading team are three time national champions and won the North Carolina State Championship in 2007 and 2010.
Cardinal Gibbons High School's Football Team were in the playoffs in 2009, 2010 and 2011. Both the men's and women's cross country team have produced star collegiate runners and are two of the winningest teams at the high school 23
Fine Arts
Cardinal Gibbons has a reputation for excellent arts programs. With visual arts and performing arts like drama and music.
Notes and references
External links
Official website
Category:Private schools in Raleigh, North Carolina Category:Roman Catholic secondary schools in North Carolina Category:Roman Catholic Diocese of Raleigh Category:Educational institutions established in 1909
http://www.cghsnc.net/Portals/0/About%20Us/CGHS%20History.pdf↩
http://nc.milesplit.us/meets/53245↩
http://www.highschoolot.com/school/cardinal_gibbons/↩
