&quot;Portsmouth&quot; is a single released by musician Mike Oldfield in 1976 (see 1976 in music). It is Oldfield's highest charting single in the United Kingdom, charting at number 3.
Details
In an attempt to repeat the success of his previous year's Christmas hit, &quot;In Dulci Jubilo&quot;, Mike recorded another traditional folk melody dating from 1701 (first known publication),12 again using Leslie Penning on recorders. The single was just as successful as its predecessor, charting at number 3 in the UK,3 and became his first non-album single to be issued in the USA. It also charted at number 19 in Ireland. Mike Oldfield plays acoustic guitar, accordion, mandolin, ARP string synthesiser, tambourine, kettle drum and bodhran (Irish drum), and both Oldfield and Penning are credited with &quot;feet&quot;.4
This song, plus two others chosen as the B-side in different countries, had been released the month before as three of four new songs on the compilation album Boxed. They were mixed and encoded for SQ quadraphonic sound, the only format this album was issued in, and all issues of these songs in vinyl and tape formats have the encoding, even if they only say &quot;stereo&quot; on the label, as do all single releases.
&quot;Argiers&quot; is another traditional folk song, performed by Leslie Penning on recorders and Mike Oldfield on acoustic guitar and ARP string synthesiser. An unusual feature of this arrangement is that it is in a minor key, having been converted from its original major key via diatonic transposition. &quot;Portsmouth&quot; and &quot;Argiers&quot; were both recorded in January 1976 at Througham, Gloucestershire, Mike's new home studio, shortly after he moved from his previous home in Hergest Ridge, which was the location of his previous home studio, the Beacon.5
&quot;Speak (Tho' You Only Say Farewell)&quot; is an old show tune performed by David Bedford on piano and vocals, and Mike Oldfield on vocals. It is similar in style to Bedford's earlier work in the Coxhill-Bedford Duo with Lol Coxhill, and was recorded at the Beacon in November 1974.6
The song is featured on the Mercury Records reissue of Ommadawn, released on 7 June 2010.
Track listing
UK 7-inch single
&quot;Portsmouth&quot; (traditional, arr. Oldfield) &lt;U+2013&gt; 2:02
&quot;Speak (Tho' You Only Say Farewell)&quot; (Ray Morello / Horatio Nicholls) &lt;U+2013&gt; 2:54
Virgin VS-163
International 7-inch single
&quot;Portsmouth&quot; (traditional, arr. Oldfield) &lt;U+2013&gt; 2:02
&quot;Argiers&quot; (traditional, arr. Oldfield) &lt;U+2013&gt; 3:59
Issued in USA, Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Spain, the Netherlands, Ireland, Yugoslavia, Australia and South Africa. Each central European country issued it in a cover unique to their country.
Ireland issued both pairings, and some copies of both editions exist mis-pressed with the B-side label belonging to the other edition.7
The single has been issued 3 times in France, in 1976, 1977 and 1980, with 3 different sleeves.
Music video
A music video was made for this song, and can be found on the DVD, Elements - The Best of Mike Oldfield. Shot in Mike's Througham studio, it shows four female folk dancers who dance around the studio, while Mike is seen playing various instruments. As in the video for Mike's previous single, &quot;In Dulci Jubilo&quot;, the video emphasizes that Mike plays all the instruments, even though this is not strictly true.
In popular culture
The piece was featured in the 1979 NASA documentary film by Tony Palmer, The Space Movie.
The song has become synonymous with English football club, Portsmouth F.C., who sometimes play the tune before or after games at their home stadium, Fratton Park. Notably it was played during their victorious FA Cup 2008 campaign, including after the final game against Cardiff City on 17 May 2008 at Wembley.
In April 2010 two groups were set up on the social networking site Facebook to encourage people to download the single &quot;Portsmouth&quot; via sites such as iTunes in the week commencing 3 May 2010, in a hope to get into the UK Singles Chart, before Portsmouth F.C.'s FA Cup Final appearance against Chelsea.89 Oldfield himself has commented on the campaign.1011 It however did not chart.
Charts
Chart
(1976)
Position
UK Singles Chart
3
References
cs:Portsmouth (Mike Oldfield)
Category:1976 singles Category:Mike Oldfield songs Category:1700s songs
↩
↩
↩
Boxed album liner notes↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
