St Peter's Church, Little Budworth is in the village of Little Budworth, Cheshire, England (). It is a Grade II* listed building.1
The is some disagreement about the correct dedication of the church. Ormerod states it is dedicated to St Mary and All Saints.2 However a bequest in 1526 was made by Hugh Starkey of Oulton to &quot;St. Peter of Budworth&quot; and the church is usually now referred to as St Peter's.3
History
The precise date of foundation of the church is not known but the west tower was erected between 1490 and 1526. The body of the church was rebuilt in stone in 1800 following a bequest from Ralph Kirkham, a wealthy merchant of Manchester. This consisted of a nave and sanctuary with no architectural division, which Richards describes as being &quot;a poor attempt at imitation of the classical style&quot;. In 1870 there was a restoration as a result of which most of the fittings were lost. By 1936 the roof timbers were becoming unsafe and they were replaced by a steel roof.4
Structure
The church is built in red sandstone ashlar with a slate roof. The plan consists of a west tower with a nave and chancel in one range.5 The tower is perpendicular in style with windows of three lights, a string course with carvings of animals and heads, and an embattled top. On the south face is a clock which was made in 1727 and a clock face dated 1785.6
Fittings and furniture
The ceilings of the nave and chancel are barrel vaults and are plastered.7 The pulpit dates from the Georgian period and the painted font from the 17th century. The latter has a fluted bowl with a scrolled cover resting on an octagonal base. It is one of the few painted fonts remaining in the county. The Grey-Egertons of Oulton Park have a vault in the church which was sealed in 1870. Memorials to members of the family include a brass relating to an incident in the Crimean War. Philip R. Egerton donated to the church a painting by Caravaggio, or a member of his school, depicting The Deposition from the Cross.8 A few fragments of pre-Reformation stained glass remain.910 The church plate includes a silver-gilt flagon from the late 17th century and a silver-gilt chalice and paten dated 1711. The ring consists of five bells made by Rudhall of Gloucester in 1714. The parish registers begin in 1561.11
Notes
External links
Category:Church of England churches Category:Grade II* listed churches Category:Churches in Cheshire Category:Grade II* listed buildings in Cheshire Category:Gothic architecture Category:1800 architecture Category:Neoclassical architecture
↩
↩
↩
↩
