Al Costello was the &quot;ring name&quot; of Giacomo Costa (December 20, 1920 - January 22, 2002) who was an Italian Australian retired professional wrestler. Costello was the first professional wrestler to be nicknamed &quot;The Man of a Thousand Holds&quot; because of his innovative and very technical style.1
Costello is most known for being the idea man behind and a member of the Tag team the Fabulous Kangaroos who&lt;U+2019&gt;s &quot;Ultra Australian&quot; gimmick complete with boomerangs, bush hats and &quot;Waltzing Matilda&quot; as their entrance music existed from 1957 until 1983 in various forms. Costello was either an active wrestler or a manager in each version of the Kangaroos.2 The first incarnation (Costello and Roy Heffernan) is the most famous and is often credited with popularizing tag team wrestling in the late 1950s and 1960s.3 Costello and Heffernan are also regarded as one of the top tag teams that ever existed.45
Costello would later form Kangaroo versions with Ray St. Clair, Don Kent and Tony Charles as well as manage Don Kent as he teamed with Bruno Bekkar and later on &quot;Johnny Heffernan&quot; (a storyline cousin of Roy Heffernan) to keep the Fabulous Kangaroos name alive.6 Costello retired in 1983 but made a few brief returns in the following years.7 in 1993 he managed The New Fabulous Kangaroos (Denny Kass and Al Snow) before retiring completly from the wrestling business.
Both Costello and and his tag team partner Heffernan would pass away before the team was honored by being the first tag team inducted in the Professional Wrestling Hall of Fame in 2003.8 The induction of the Fabulous Kangaroos started a tradition of inducting a new team every year.9
Growing up
Costello (Costa) was born in Lingua di Salina in Italy, near Sicily and grew up there until his family emigrated to Australia when the young Costello was six years old.10 The family settled in Rockdale, New South Wales where Costello would help out in his father&lt;U+2019&gt;s fruit store when he was old enough. Costello excelled at school sports and became interested in weightlifting at a pretty early age. When he turned 16 years old Costello took up amateur boxing despite his father&lt;U+2019&gt;s wishes that the young Costello would become an opera singer.11 One night he was approached by Australian middleweight wrestling champion &quot;Basher Bonas&quot; who convinced him to give wrestling a try. Costello made his debut under an assumed name, his father still had hopes of him becoming an opera singer and he did not want them to find out he was wrestling. He came up with the name &quot;Al Costello&quot;, thinking it sounded tough like a Portmanteau of Al Capone and Frank Costello.12
Wrestling career
Al Costello made his professional wrestling debut in 1938 but the man that would be known as &quot;The Man of a Thousand Holds&quot; 20 years later found little success early in his career. The general belief in Australian wrestling at the time was that a wrestler really had to go overseas to North America and learn to be a pro before the bookers would even consider pushing them up the card.13 Costello would travel all across Asia in search of success and did see his share of it winning the Malaysian Heavyweight title in 1939 as well as the South Africa trophy in 1949. Costello finally started to see success at home as well winning the Australasian title in the early 1950s.14 Im 1952 Costello had begun wrestling in America in the hopes of finally breaking through and making a big name of himself.15
Fabulous Kangaroos
For years Al Costello had been working on an idea for a new tag team, he even had an idea who his partner should be in this new tag team, a wrestler he had worked with some years ago Roy Heffernan. The problem was that Costello and Heffernan had lost touch over the years so the idea remained dormant until Costello went on a tour of Hawaii in 1956. Costello mentioned his idea of an &quot;Ultra Australian&quot; tag team to fellow wrestler and future promoter Joe Blanchard. Blanchard was good friends with Heffernan and knew that he was working in Stampede Wrestling at that point in time. Blanchard put the two in touch with each other and soon after Costello was off to Calgary, Alberta, Canada to join up with Costello. Costello and Heffernan made their debut as the Fabulous Kangaroos on May 3, 1957 for Stu Hart&lt;U+2019&gt;s Stampede Wrestling promotion in a match against Maurice LaPointe and Tony Baillargeon. Only weeks after making their debut the Kangaroos were working with the top tag teams in the promotion.16
After working in Stampede for a while the Fabulous Kangaroos started to travel across the United States headlining shows wherever they went due to their ability to rile the crowd up with their heel (bad guy) tactics. On one occasion in August of 1958 the Kangaroos, or &quot;Kangaroo Men&quot; as they were billed nearly caused a riot in Madison Square Garden during a match against Antonino Rocca and  Miguel P&lt;U+00E9&gt;rez . The fans began to throw fruit and stones at the after the match ended without a decisive winner, the promoters had to step in, turn up the lights in the arena and play the National Anthem to stop a potential riot from breaking out.17 Everywhere the team went they seemed to win championships, be in the Texas version of the  NWA World Tag Team Championship in Dory Funk&lt;U+2019&gt;s NWA Western States promotion or even the forerunner to the WWWF United States Tag Team Championship the North East version of the NWA United States Tag Team Championship.18
During their time together from 1957 until 1965 the Kangaroos wrestled in the United States, Canada, Asia and select tours of Australia and New Zealand. They worked for such companies as Capitol Wrestling Corporation (the future World Wrestling Entertainment), Championship Wrestling from Florida, NWA Ohio, the Japan Wrestling Association and the World Wrestling Association in Los Angeles.19
The Kangaroos never forgot the territory that started it all and worked in Canada off and on over they years. The team not only worked for Stampede Wrestling while in Canada but also worked for NWA All-Star Wrestling based in Vancouver, British Columbia. The Fabulous Kangaroos&lt;U+2019&gt; run in NWA All-Star Wrestling turned out to be the last time the original Kangaroos would team together. In June of 1965 the Kangaroos lost to Don Leo Jonathan and Jim Hardy and then split up. Heffernan had left Australia to tour the world in 1953 and wanted to return to his homeland while Costello was determined to remain in the United States at least for a while longer.20
Between Kangaroos
Heffernan returned to Australia and began working for  World Championship Wrestling (the Australian version not the North American wrestling federation) with booker Jim Barnett as a singles wrestler. Costello was originally supposed to return to Australia as well and work for WCW but those plans never came through.21 Instead Costello remained in the United States and kept working in the tag team division never seeking a career as a singles wrestler. Costello began wrestling for Georgia Championship Wrestling where he would team up with Louis Tillet to form a tag-team known as &quot;The Globetrotters&quot; playing off Costello&lt;U+2019&gt;s Australian and Tillet&lt;U+2019&gt;s French heritage.22 The Globetrotters defeated the Mysterious Medics in the finals of a tournament to crown new champions for the Georgia version of the  NWA World Tag Team Championship. The team only held the championship for a week before losing it to Kurt and Karl Von Brauner on February 4, 1966.23 After losing the championship the Globetrotters broke up due to differences in their approach to tag teaming.24
After the Globetrotters broke up Costello moved on to the Nashville, Tennessee area, specifically the NWA Mid-America territory. In Mid-American Costello would team with Herb Welch to win the Mid-American version of the  NWA World Tag Team Championship and hold it just over 2 months.25 While working in Mid-America Costello started to team with Karl Von Brauner, who used a &quot;German Nazi&quot; gimmick despite being American. Under the management of &quot;Playboy&quot; Gary Hart Costello and Von Brauner was billed as &quot;The Internationals&quot;. The team would later be managed by George &quot;Crybaby&quot; Cannon.26 The Internationals worked mainly in Tennessee and in Texas for NWA Western States. In Texas Costello and Von Brauner won the Texas version of the NWA World Tag Team Championship, a title Costello and Heffernan had held in 1958. They were also billed as the first NWA American Tag Team Champions, a title also recognized by World Class Championship Wrestling. The Internationals would lose the American Tag Team title to Fritz and Waldo Von Erich on February 21, 1967.27 After the Internationals lost the title Kurt decided to go back to teaming with his storyline brother Karl Von Brauner.28
After the Internationals broke up Costello returned to Australia to visit friends and relatives and to recuperate after the many years on the road. On his way back to the United States Costello had a stop over in Detroit where he met Cleo Williams, the two fell in love and married shortly afterwards remaining together for the rest of Costello&lt;U+2019&gt;s life.29
Kangaroos once more
 In 1967 Al Costello had reformed the Fabulous Kangaroos with Ray St. Clair. The team had been touring non-stop for about six months when St. Clair was forced to retire due to knee problems. A few months after St. Clair retired Costello found a new man to don the bush hat: Don Kent. Kent who was from Michigan adopted the Ultra-Australian gimmick (but retained his American accent) and the seconds most known version of the Fabulous Kangaroos was formed. Costello and Kent teamed together on a regular basis from 1968 until 1974, approximately the same amount of time that Costello spent teaming with his original partner Roy Heffernan.30 The Kangaroos won their tag team championship only months after teaming up, during a tour of Japan for &quot;International Wrestling Enterprise&quot;. Over the years many more title reigns would come in various promotions all over the globe. In Canada they were the first Eastern Sports Association  International Tag Team Champions, in the  World Wrestling Association they would hold the WWA World Tag Team Championship twice.31 In addition to winning titles all over North America they also made appearances for the World Wide Wrestling Federation (now known as World Wrestling Entertainment.32
The Kangaroos frequented NWA Detroit where they held the Detroit version of the  NWA World Tag Team Championship. for most of 1971.33 By the end of 1972 the Kangaroos began working for Nick Gulas&lt;U+2019&gt; NWA Mid-America. In Mid-America they would hold the local version of the  NWA World Tag Team Championship, the Mid-America version on three occations.34
After a match in the Cincinnati Gardens an enraged fan took a fire extinguisher off the wall and threw it at Costello and Kent from the balcony of the Gardens. The extinguisher hit Costello in the hip, damaging it so much that Costello would need hip replacement surgery later that year. The fan was arrested, served 15 days in jail, and fined fifty dollars for damaging the fire extinguisher. The hip injury meant that Costello was unable to compete and the Fabulous Kanagroos split up.35 Don Kent returned to NWA Mid-America while Costello had to have a full hip replacement and was forced to retire from active competition.36
Managing
In 1975 Costello surprised everyone by returning to professional wrestling as a manager managing the team known as &quot;The Love Brothers&quot; (Hartford and Reggie Love) and would actually step into the ring on occasion as part of special six-man tag team matches.37
After recovering from his hip surgery Costello returned to active competition at the age of 56. The fact that he was able to recover from such a major injury is credited to his almost fanatically healthy living. As a devout vegan Costello himself credited his meat free diet for his ability to recover and for the remarkable shape he was in for a man of his advanced age.38 Costello reformed the Kangaroos once more, this time teaming up with Tony Charles. This team defeated Dominic DeNucci and Chris Markoff to win the Detroit version of the NWA World Tag Team title that Costello and Kent had held in the past. The Kangaroos time with the gold was short as they lost the title to &quot;Crazy&quot; Luke Graham and Ripper Colins in short order39 In 1977 Tony Charles was replaced by Don Kent as the two reunited for a tour of Puerto Rico with the WWC. In Puerto Rico the Kangaroos arrived billed as the WWC World Tag Team Champions, once more to give a new title legitimacy. The Kangaroos dropped the titles to Carlos Colon and Jose Rivera on March 12, 1977. The Kangaroos would remain in WWC through out 1977 and into 1978, chasing but never quite regaining the WWC World Tag Team Championship.40 After their tour in Puerto Rico ended Don Kent returned to singles wrestling and Costello focused more on managing.
Shortlived return
In 1977 after having recovered from hip surgery Al Costello once again asked Kent to team up with him as the Fabulous Kangaroos for a tour of Puerto Rico with the WWC. In Puerto Rico the Kangaroos arrived billed as the WWC World Tag Team Champions, once more to give a new title legitimacy. The Kangaroos dropped the titles to Carlos Colon and Jose Rivera on March 12, 1977. The Kangaroos would remain in WWC through out 1977 and into 1978, chasing but never quite regaining the WWC World Tag Team Championship.41 After their tour in Puerto Rico ended Don Kent returned to singles wrestling and Costello focused more on managing due to his bad hip.
Still a Kangaroo
In 1981 Costello convinced Kent to once again don the bush hat and pick up the boomerang once more. Costello had Kent team up with Bruno Bekkar, who was mostly known from working in his native New Zealand and Australia, and work a tour for the WWC with Costello serving as their manager.42 Kent and Bekkar would win the WWC North American Tag Team title from the team of Jack and Jerry Brisco on October 22, 1981. This version of the Kangaroos would first lose to, then quickly regain the titles from Invader I and Super Gladiador before dropping them for good on January 26, 1982 to Invader and Gladiador once more.43 The Kent and Bekkar team only lasted for one tour of the Caribbean after which Bruno Bekkar returned to Australia and New Zealand to work for the local promotions there.44
Instead Kent was replaced with &quot;Johnny Heffernan&quot; (Canadian Bob Della Serra) a storyline cousin of Roy Heffernan for what would be the final Kangaroo version to compete.45 The team ended Terry and Dory Funk, Jr.&lt;U+2019&gt;s year and a half long run with the WWC World Tag Team championship when they defeated them on May 1, 1982. The team would hold the gold for less than 2 months before losing them again.46 After ending their tour in Puerto Rico Kent and Heffernan returned to mainland USA to work for Championship Wrestling from Florida, a promotion the Kangaroos last worked for in 1962. In Florida the Kangaroos won the NWA Florida Global Tag Team Championship 4 times.47 The final storyline involving the Fabulous Kangaroos saw Al Costello bring in J.J. Dillon to act as his short term replacement as he &quot;took care of business&quot;. When Costello returned from his business trip Dillon refused to give up the Kangaroos contracts and was backed up by both Kent and Costello (in storyline terms). This storyline was designed to write Al Costello out of the Fabulous Kangaroos storyline and allow him to retire from wrestling all together.48 Not long after Costello retired Kent and Della Serra went their seperate ways..49
Retirement
After retiring from wrestling Al Costello became the head of security at College Harbour, Florida. In 1992 Costello retired from his job in Florida and began teaching wrestling at the age of 71. He would also start to manage a new generation of Fabulous Kangaroos in 1993 as Mickey Doley and Denny Kass formed &quot;The New Fabulous Kangaroos&quot; in &quot;Motor City Wrestling&quot; (MCW).50 By the fall of 1993 Mickey Doyle had been replaced by a young wrestler by the name of Al Snow and with Costello&lt;U+2019&gt;s help the New Fabulous Kangaroos defeated &quot;Canadian Lighting&quot; (Otis Apollo and &quot;Irish&quot; Bobby Clancy) on December 29, 1993 to win the Motor City Wrestling Tag Team Championship.51 On May 14, 1994 Kass and Snow defeate Canadian Lighting to win the Border City Wrestling (BCW) Can-Am Tag Team Championship unifying the two tag team championships. A week later the New Fabulous Kangaroos would lose both sets of titles to Scott D'Amore and &quot;Irish&quot; Bobby Clancy.52 After losing the unified MCW/BCW Tag Team championships the New Kangaroos split up, Snow focused on his WWF career while Costello retired for good, never making another wrestling related apperance.
Death
On January 22, 2000 the original Fabulous Kangaroo Al Costello died. Costello had been suffering from pneumonia and was diagnosed with heart problems, the combination of which took his life at 80.53 In 2003 the Professional Wrestling Hall of Fame inducted Al Costello along with Roy Heffernan as the first ever tag team to be inducted into the Hall of Fame.54 From 2003 and forward the Hall of Fame has honored other tag teams but the Fabulous Kangaroos were given the honor of being the first team to enter the Hall of Fame, some would say &quot;They were billed as champions on arrival&quot; much like they were many places they went.55
In wrestling
Finishing Moves
:*The Boomerang
Managers
:*&quot;Wild&quot; Red Berry
:*George &quot;Crybaby&quot; Cannon
:*&quot;Sir&quot; Dudley Clement
Wrestlers Managed by Costello
:*Don Kent
:*Bruno Bekkar
:*Johnny Heffernan
:*Al Snow
:*Mickey Doyle
:*Denny Kass
:*The Love Brothers (Reginald and Hartford)
:*Kurt Von Hess
Championships and accomplishments
Alex Turk Promotions (Winnipeg)
:*International Tag Team Championship (2 times) - with Roy Heffernan56
Capitol Sports
:*NWA United States Tag Team Championship (Northeast version) (3 times) - with Roy Heffernan57
Championship Wrestling from Florida
:*NWA Florida United States Tag Team Championship (1 time) - with Roy Heffernan58
:*NWA World Tag Team Championship (Florida version) (1 time) - with Roy Heffernan59
Eastern Sports Association
:*ESA International Tag Team Championship (1 time) - with Don Kent60
Georgia Championship Wrestling
:*NWA World Tag Team Championship (Georgia version) 1 time &lt;U+2013&gt; with Louie Tillet
International Wrestling Enterprise (Japan)
:*Trans-World Wrestling Alliance World Tag Team Championship (1 time) - with Don Kent61
'''Japan Wrestling Association
:*NWA International Tag Team Championship (1 time) - with Roy Heffernan62
Midwest Wrestling Association
:*NWA. United States Tag Team Championship (Ohio Version) (1 time) - with Roy Heffernan63
National Wrestling Alliance
::*NWA Southern Junior Heavyweight Championship (1 time)
New Zealand Wrestling Union
:*Australasian Heavyweight Championship (1 time)
NWA Mid-America
:*NWA World Tag Team Championship (Mid-America version) 4 times) - with Don Kent (3), Herb Welch (1)64
NWA All-Star Wrestling
:*NWA Canadian Tag Team Championship (Vancouver version) 4 times) - with Roy Heffernan65
NWA Detroit
:*NWA World Tag Team Championship (Detroit version) (3 times) - with Roy Heffernan (2), Ray St. Clair (1)66
NWA New Mexico
:*Rocky Mountain Tag Team Championship (1 time) - with Roy Heffernan67
NWA Western States (Amarillo)
:*NWA American Tag Team Championship (Texas Version) (1 time) - with Karl Von BraunerA 68
:*NWA International Tag Team Championship (Texas version) (1 time) - with Roy HeffernanA 69
:*NWA World Tag Team Championship (Texas version) (2 times) - with Roy Heffernan (1), Karl Von Brauner (1)70
World Wrestling Association
:*WWA World Tag Team Championship (2 times) - with Don Kent71
World Wrestling Association (Los Angeles)
:*WWA World Tag Team Championship (1 time) - with Roy Heffernan72
World Wrestling Council
:*WWC World Tag Team Championship (1 time) - with Don Kent73
Professional Wrestling Hall of Fame
:*Class of 2003 - with Roy Heffernan74
Wrestling Observer
:*Wrestling Observer Newsletter Hall of Fame: 1996 - with Roy Heffernan
References
External Links
New Fabulous Kangaroos Tribute page
Roy Heffernan Interview
Category:1920 births Category:2002 deaths Category:Australian professional wrestlers Category:Italian Australians Category:Italian professional wrestlers Category:National Wrestling Alliance alumni Category:Stampede Wrestling alumni Category:World Class Championship Wrestling alumni Category:World Wrestling Entertainment alumni
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
