The Consulate General of the Federal Republic of Germany in Chennai represents the interests of the German government in the Chennai and surrounding regions. The current Consul General is Stefan Weckbach since August 2011. He succeeds Hans-Burkhardt Sauerteig.
Location
The Consulate General is located at 9, Boat Club Road, Raja Annamalai Puram. Until 2006, it was located at 22, Ethiraj Road, Egmore.1 The Goethe Institute, the cultural institute of Germany, is located at 4 Rutland Gate, 5th Street, Nungambakkam.
Functions
The consular districts falling under the jurisdiction of the Chennai Consulate General are Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh and Pondicherry. The consular services provided by the German Consulate Chennai to Indian Citizens include life certificates and pension certificates; attestation of documents, signatures and copies; German value added tax refund; and marriages both in India and Germany.
In June 2005, the Consulate General introduced an online appointment service for all categories of visa applications.2 The Consulate General processes visa applications from the states of Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Kerala, Tamil Nadu and Pondicherry.34 In 2006, the Consulate opened new visa application centres at Chennai, Bangalore, Hyderabad and Kochi.5 The number of visas has been going up by 10 percent annually.6
Goethe Institut
The Goethe Institut Chennai, known locally as the Max Mueller Bhavan Chennai, is the cultural institute of the Federal Republic of Germany at Chennai with a global reach. Formerly located at Khader Nawaz Khan Road, Nungambakkam for 19 years since 1988, the centre was moved to a 13,000-sq-ft premises located at 4, Rutland Gate, 5th Street, Thousand Lights region of Chennai in 2007.7 It houses a library and information centre, language department, education department and culture department, in addition to an auditorium and an art gallery. The German Academic Exchange Services (Deutscher Akademischer Austausch Dienst or DAAD Information Centre) also functions from the Goethe Institut premises. The centre promotes knowledge of German language and fosters international cooperation by advancing Germany's cultural, social and political life. The current director of the institute is Gabriele M. Landwehr.
DAAD Information Centre
The DAAD Information Center Chennai is a service center for Indian students and scholars established by the German Academic Exchange Service in cooperation with Goethe Institut Chennai. Established in October 2001, the centre provides comprehensive and free counselling to students planning to study and research in Germany. The DAAD Information Center Chennai offers counselling services for the Southern region of India covering Tamil Nadu, Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh and Kerala. Services include information session on higher studies and research opportunities in Germany, individual counselling, annual education fairs and presentation at partner institutions, universities or special occasions.
See also
List of diplomatic missions in Chennai
List of diplomatic missions of Germany
Foreign policy of Germany
Foreign relations of India
Foreign relations of Germany
Germany&lt;U+2013&gt;India relations
References
External links
Official website of the German Consulate General in Chennai
Homepage of Goethe-Institut/Max Mueller Bhavan Chennai
DAAD Information Center Chennai homepage
Indo-German Chamber of Commerce homepage
Category:Diplomatic missions of Germany Category:Diplomatic missions in India Category:Foreign relations of Germany Category:Organisations based in Chennai
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
