Kimberley Joseph (born August 30, 1973) is a Canadian-Australian actress who is based in the United States. Joseph was rasied on the Gold Coast in Australia and was educated in Switzerland. She began a degree at Bond University but dropped out when she was cast in the soap opera Paradise Beach at the age of 19. She had no formal acting training but appeared in the soap for the 18 months it was produced. After Paradise Beach she had casual work on Hey Hey It's Saturday before she co-hosted the popular Seven Network series Gladiators.
After two series of Gladiators, Joseph was eager to return to acting, so took a role as villain Joanne Brennan in Home and Away from 1995 to 1996. In 1999, she moved to the United States to study acting at the Atlantic Theater Company in New York, before spending 18 months trying for auditions in Los Angeles. In 2001, she was cast as Jo Ellison in the British television series Cold Feet. She appeared in the fourth and fifth series and returned to Australia two days after filming the final episode in 2002. In 2004, she appeared in a major recurring role as Dr. Grace Connelly in six episodes of the Australian soap opera All Saints. She returned to America after filming All Saints, where she got a small role as flight attendant Cindy Chandler in the pilot episode of Lost. The role was supposed to be a one-off in the pilot but a producer liked Joseph and the character, so brought her back for a recurring role in the second and third seasons.
Early life and education
Kimberley Joseph was born on August 30, 1973 in Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada to Joe and Wendy.1 Joe, a Canadian businessman, met Wendy, an Australian air hostess while she was in Canada.2 When Kimberley was three years old, the family moved to Australia's Gold Coast, where she attended St Hilda's School for the next nine years. The family travelled extensively in Europe, and Kimberley attended a private school in Montreux, Switzerland for four years. While there, she learned to speak French and Spanish.3 When she returned to Australia, she began reading for a degree in arts and commerce at Bond University, though did not complete it.4
Career
At the age of 19, Joseph dropped out of university when she got the part of Cassie Barsby in the soap opera Paradise Beach.56 Like many of the cast she had no formal acting training, though she turned this to her advantage with &quot;exuberance and energy&quot;.78 The short-lived soap was on Australian screens for 15 months before being cancelled but Joseph gained experience and friendships with Raelee Hill, Megan Connolly, and Isla Fisher.910 After Paradise Beach ended, she began appearing in the Nine Network variety show Hey Hey It's Saturday. Joseph had no contract with Nine, and was making the appearances because she was friends with host Daryl Somers. Nine Network executives wanted to make her a regular on the show and began using her in publicity material, however, rival network Seven offered her a contract to co-host Gladiators before Nine could make her Hey Hey contract permanent. Her defection to Nine in 1995 caused a small scandal.11 She described hosting Gladiators as &quot;tough and scary&quot; on account of the live audience.12 She appeared for two series and some international specials before taking the role of Joanne Brennan in Home and Away in an effort to get away from presenting.13 The character, a secretary who dealt drugs to school children, appeared from 1995 to 1996. She left the soap with the possibility of returning to the character. Alongside her role in Home and Away, she appeared in a play with Geoffrey Hughes.14
Unitl 1999, she worked as a &quot;jobbing actress&quot;, making appearances in Hercules: the Legendary Journeys and Sale of the Century.1516 Eager to move away from soap opera acting, Joseph moved to the United States to study acting with the Atlantic Theater Company in New York.1718 She then moved to Los Angeles where she spent 18 months living off her savings trying to get auditions.19 In those 18 months, her only jobs were a single commericial and a job interviewing LA-based film actors for Australian television.20 In 2001, her lawyer informed her that she would have to travel to Sydney to be interviewed for her green card. On the day she was due to fly back to Australia, her agent informed her of an audition for the British television series Cold Feet, whose producer was looking for an Australian actress to become a new main cast member. Two weeks later she had moved to Manchester and was doing script read-throughs with the rest of the cast.21 Her character, Jo Ellison, appeared in all episodes of the fourth and fifth series. Two days after filming the final episode in 2002, Joseph left Britain and returned to Australia.22
In 2004, she appeared on Australian television for the first time since a regular role in Tales of the South Seas in 1999, playing Dr. Grace Connelly for six episodes on All Saints. The day after she completed filming of her scenes, she returned to Los Angeles for the pilot season.23 She got a small part as a flight attendant in the pilot episode of Lost. Joseph's scenes, on an airplane set, were filmed over two and a half days in Los Angeles. An early script draft of the pilot called for her character to be seen dead on a beach, though subsequent rewrites removed the scene. A producer liked Joseph and her character, and planned to bring both back to the series at a later date. She returned at the beginning of the second season, when it was revealed that her character, given the name Cindy Chandler, had survived the plane crash in the pilot episode along with other passengers from the tail section of the plane. Despite being asked not to change her appearance too much after the pilot, Joseph had her haircut, so in her first few episodes of the second season, she had to &quot;go through the whole debacle of putting a Rambo scarf around [her] head, which just looked ridiculous.&quot;24 Her episodes for season 2 were filmed over five weeks and were broadcast in 2005.25 Her character was abducted in the middle of an episode and was not seen again until in the third season, when Joseph reprised the role for two episodes and the whereabouts of her character are revealed. She has a minor role in Angels &amp; Demons.26
Personal life
As of 2006, Joseph lived in Los Angeles with a blind cocker spaniel that she rescued off the streets.27 She has been involved in Aid International projects highlighting the effects of Soviet nuclear testing in Semey, Kazakhstan. In 2003 she visited the area with Struan Stevenson, where she photographed victims of radiation poisoning. The photographs were displayed in the Scottish Parliament building in 2004,28 and published in Struan's book Crying Forever.29 She returned to the area with Struan in July 2008 and is planning to make a documentary film to attract international attention to the area.30
Filmography
Year
Title
Position
Other notes
1992
Paradise Beach
Cassie Barsby
Main cast member
1995
Gladiators
Presenter
Home and Away
Joanne Brennan
Recurring role (1995&lt;U+2013&gt;1996)
1997
Hercules: The Legendary Journeys
Nemesis
2 episodes (&quot;Two Men and a Baby&quot; [1997] and &quot;Full Circle&quot; [1999])
1998
Tales of the South Seas
Clare Devon
Recurring role (1998&lt;U+2013&gt;1999)
1999
Water Rats
Mary Worth
1 episode (&quot;Dangerous Encounters&quot;)
2001
Cold Feet
Jo Ellison
Main cast member (2001&lt;U+2013&gt;2003)
2004
Go Big
Sophie Duvet
All Saints
Dr. Grace Connelly
Recurring role (6 episodes)
Lost
Cindy Chandler
Recurring role (2004&lt;U+2013&gt;2007)
2005
Fight Night
Tracey
2009
Angels &amp; Demons
Australian Reporter
References
External links
Official website
de:Kimberley Joseph es:Kimberley Joseph fr:Kimberley Joseph pl:Kimberley Joseph pt:Kimberley Joseph
Category:1973 births Category:Australians of Canadian descent Category:Australian female models Category:Australian television actors Category:Australian game show hosts Category:Australian photographers Category:Living people Category:People from Vancouver
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
