On January 30, 1964, a successful coup led by General Nguyen Khanh ousted the military junta led by General Duong Van Minh from the leadership of South Vietnam. It came less than three months after Minh's junta had themselves come to power in a bloody coup against then President Ngo Dinh Diem. The coup was bloodless and took less than a few hours.
Background
Khanh had long been regarded as an ambitious and unscrupulous officer.1 Following the partition of Vietnam, Khanh, a French trained officer who served in the French-backed Vietnamese National Army during the First Indochina War, had rallied to support Ngo Dinh Diem, who became the first president of the anti-communist South Vietnam. He rose to become the deputy chief of staff in the Army of the Republic of Vietnam, but his record of loyalty was called into question. In 1960, during an attempted coup by rebel paratroopers, Khanh jumped over the palace walls and joined Diem during the siege, trying to negotiate an end to the stand-off with the rebels.2 Khanh parleyed with the rebels long enough for loyal forces to arrive from the provinces to suppress the uprising, but his critics contended that he was waiting to see which side would gain the upper hand and was not committed to Diem.34 In his younger days, Khanh had joined the Vietminh but then defected to the French colonial army. Khanh claimed that he had left the Vietminh because of its communist inclinations, but critics claimed that he was simply switching sides because the French-backed State of Vietnam offered him more opportunities for advancement.56
Khanh participated in the 1963 South Vietnamese coup that deposed Diem, playing a minor role. Khanh expected a large reward, but the junta instead sidelined him, excluding him from the twelve-man Military Revolutionary Council.7 In mid-December he was moved from the II Corps in the central highlands to the command of the I Corps of the Army of the Republic of Vietnam, based around Hu&lt;U+1EBF&gt; and Da Nang in the far north of the Republic of Vietnam. This, it was speculated, was to keep him far away from Saigon.89 This was contrary to Khanh's request for a transfer to the Mekong Delta close to Saigon where most of the fighting was taking place. In an interview with Robert Shaplen, Khanh made no attempt to hide his annoyance at not being given a more important job. With respect to the 1963 coup, he cryptically commented &quot;It is too soon yet to tell the whole story, but someday I will tell it to you&quot;.10
At the time, the South Vietnamese government was plagued by infighting. A civilian government and cabinet led by Prime Minister Nguyen Ngoc Tho was appointed by the MRC to accompany the junta. However, the presence of Generals Don and Ton That Dinh in both the civilian cabinet and the MRC paralysed the governance process. Dinh and Don were subordinate to Tho in the civilian government, but as members of the MRC they were superior to him. Whenever Tho gave an order in the civilian hierarchy with which the generals disagreed, they would go into the MRC and give a counter-order.11
The junta was paralysed because all twelve generals in the MRC had equal power. Each member of the MRC had the power of veto, enabling them to stonewall policy decisions.12 The press strongly attacked Tho, accusing his government of being &quot;tools&quot; of the MRC.13 The media further derided Tho for the personal benefits that he gained from the Diem administration's land policy.14
On January 1, 1964, a Council of Notables comprising sixty leading citizens met for the first time. Its job was to advise the military and civilian wings of the government with a view towards reforming human rights, the constitution and the legal system.15 The council, which consisted almost entirely of professionals and academic leaders, soon became engaged in endless debate and never achieved its initial task of drafting a new constitution.16
The provisional government lacked direction in policy and planning, resulting in it quickly losing control.17 Minh was criticised for being lethargic and disinterested in running the country.18 The number of rural attacks instigated by the Vietcong surged in the wake of Diem's deposal, due to the displacement of troops into urban areas for the coup. The increasingly free discussion generated from the surfacing of new and accurate data following the coup revealed that the military situation was far worse than what was reported by Diem. The incidence of Vietcong attacks continued to increase as it had done during the summer of 1963, the weapons loss ratio worsened and the rate of Vietcong defections fell. The units that participated in the coup were returned to the field to guard against a possible major communist offensive in the countryside. The falsification of military statistics by Diem's officials had led to miscalculations, which manifested themselves in military setbacks after Diem's death.19
Khanh claimed that &lt;U+201C&gt;After the November coup, there was much relaxation, wining and dining, and little prosecution of the war effort.&lt;U+201D&gt;20 Khanh claimed that he has built up intelligence infrastructure to weed out the Vietcong under Diem&lt;U+2019&gt;s rule, but that the other generals had disbanded it and released communist prisoners.21
First moves
About a month before Minh's junta was overthrown, Khanh was approached by one of the principal tacticians in the removal of Diem, General Do Mau. A colonel at the time of the previous coup, Mau had been head of military security under Diem. Although he did not explicitly command troops, Mau had a thorough knowledge of the backgrounds of most of the Army of the Republic of Vietnam officers and their strengths and weaknesses.22 This had allowed him to help engineer the previous coup. The MRC respected Mau, but their fears about his shrewdness led them to place him in the relatively powerless post of Minister of Information. Mau's closest aides were posted further away from any real power.23 Mau began to search for officers to replace the junta, searching for exiles in Cambodia and France as well as those who had returned to Vietnam after the overthrow of Diem. The most important link in Mau's plan was Colonel Nguyen Chanh Thi, the former paratroop commander who had fled to Cambodia in the wake of the failed 1960 coup attempt against Diem. Mau persuaded the junta to install Thi as Khanh's deputy in the I Corps. He tricked the junta into doing so by reasoning that Khanh had largely been responsible for putting down the 1960 revolt and that Thi would be an ideal mechanism for keeping Khanh in check. Privately, Mau predicted that Thi would be a bridge between him in Saigon and Khanh in Hue. He was correct in thinking that the 1960 conflict would be irrelevant in the shifting of allegiances of time and that the pair would work together for their current aims.24 Mau recruited a second figure in the form of General Tran Thien Khiem, who was one of Khanh's fellow cadets and had worked with Mau during the November coup. Khiem had assisted Diem in putting down the 1960 plot and had since been demoted from being Chief of Staff of the ARVN to the commander of the III Corps that surrounded Saigon. Khiem readily joined the plot and controlled the 5th and 7th Divisions of the ARVN, which were based in Bien Hoa and My Tho north and south of Saigon respectively.25 This brought the two division commanders subordinate to Khiem into the plot. Khiem, Khanh and Mau kept in touch surreptitiously on a regular basis, supplementing their forces with an assortment of Marine, Air Force and Special Forces officers. Another notable recruit was the chief of the Civil Guard, Duong Ngoc Lam who had recently been promoted from Colonel to General. He was under investigation by the junta for swindling military funds and was readily converted. Another was General Duong Van Duc, who had recently returned from exile in Paris and was an assistant to General Le Van Kim, the chief of the junta's general staff.26
In late December and early January, student demonstrations in South Vietnam were held against neutralism and de Gaulle. The Council of Notables had accused the provisional government of lacking a firm issue on the neutralist issue and went as far as to recommend that South Vietnam suspend diplomatic relations with France. The rumours and crisis heightened when a reputed French agent, Lieutenant Colonel Tran Dinh Lan suddenly returned to Saigon after spending several years in France. He had served in both the French and Vietnamese Army and had brought with him several million US dollars worth of South Vietnamese piasters. Lan moved into the home of one of Kim's top aides, fuelling speculation that more French agents were arriving in the capital. Such rumours served to spread the belief that a French-sponsored neutralist deal was imminent and gave the conspirators an opportunity to act.27
Duc had years of experience in France had given him a good feel of what the French might be up to and what their relations with Francophile members of the ARVN were. He used this to concoct some plausible sounding and incriminating documents for Mau. They purported to show that three prominent members of the junta: Generals Minh, Le Van Kim and Tran Van Don had been bought by French agents and were on the brink of declaring South Vietnam's neutrality and sign a peace deal to end the war with the North. Don was the Minister of Defense and Minh was the president. Some of the documents were leaked to elements of the American presence in Saigon and were brought to the attention of some senior American officials.28
The junta had failed to assert control over the country following the downfall of Diem. Khanh, upset by his treatment, began conspiring with General Tran Thien Khiem, who was commander of the Saigon region, another officer who felt that his contribution to the Diem coup was overlooked. They met covertly in Saigon or in Khanh's headquarters in Hu&lt;U+1EBF&gt; beginning in early January, and scheduled the coup for 0400 January 30.29
Coup
According to the plan, Khiem's forces in Saigon would surround the homes of the sleeping junta members while Khanh and a paratrooper unit would occupy the general staff headquarters near Tan Son Nhut Air Base. On January 28, Khanh flew from Hu&lt;U+1EBF&gt; to Saigon dressed in civilian clothes on a commercial airliner. He covered for his ruse by travelling with United States military adviser Colonel Jasper Wilson and stated that he had come for a dental appointment. Khanh stayed at the house of a friend and waited for the coup.30
As the time approached, he donned his paratrooper uniform and headed to the staff headquarters, where he saw that the compound was empty apart from a few guards. When he telephoned Khiem, he found that his co-conspirator had overslept after having forgotten to set his alarm clock. Despite this, by daybreak, Khanh had taken over the government without a shot being fired, stating in a morning radio broadcast that he had conducted the coup because of the junta's failure to make progress against the Vietcong.31
Khanh held a number of meetings with American officers in Hue during the first two weeks of January. In addition to routine military matters, coup discussions were also reported to have taken place. Khanh also regularly flew down to Saigon to take part in plotting with his colleagues. These usually took place in the secluded house of a colonel who was a nearby province chief. Khanh began growing a small goatee, which he customarily grew when he was attempting a new project and would only shave once the job had been completed.3233 During this time, Khanh spread rumours in the capital that the French were behind a plan to install a pro-communist government that would implement de Gaulle&lt;U+2019&gt;s plans for the neutralization of Vietnam.34 The French Foreign Office had announced that Paris would establish diplomatic relations with Peking on January 28, and Khanh used this as an opportunity to play on American anti-neutralist sentiment. He told various American officials that Don, Kim and General Mai Huu Xuan, along with Minh, were &lt;U+201C&gt;pro-French and pro-neutralist&lt;U+201D&gt; and part of de Gaulle&lt;U+2019&gt;s plan. Khanh claimed that the fact that Don had invited two members of the French National Assembly—both from de Gaulle&lt;U+2019&gt;s party—to dinner with him, Kim and Minh as proof.35
On January 29, Colonel Thi followed Khanh to the capital. The plotters and their agents met in out of the way spots around town. On the night of January 29, Mau and Khiem alerted their troops to assume their positions around Saigon. These included many of those used in the first coup:Armored cars and tanks and some elements from the 5th and 7th Divisions, two airborne battalions and one Marine battalion and a assortment of Special Forces, Ranger and Civil Guard units. A number of American officers and embassy officials were alerted to be in their officers at two o'clock in the morning. At 0300, Khanh took over the Joint General Staff Headquarters at Tan Son Nhut airport. Lodge was kept fully informed throughout the night.36
Reaction and aftermath
At the time Charles de Gaulle wanted to recognize communist China and make South Vietnam neutral. The plotters accused the ruling junta of being part of de Gaulles' plot.
US officials in Washington were caught off guard by the coup. Although Khanh had already told CIA agent Lucien Conein (who helped to plan the coup against Diem) in December 1963 that he intended to hold a coup, it was filed away among the many political rumour documents that were received by the American representatives. Following the coup, he was promoted by the Americans as South Vietnam's new hope.
At the time, French President Charles de Gaulle was contemplating recognising the People's Republic of China and wanted Southeast Asia neutralised as part of his agenda. Khanh used this to enact retribution against Generals Tran Van Don and Le Van Kim, part of the former junta. Khanh had both of them arrested, claiming that they were part of a neutralist plot with the French. Khanh noted that they had served in the Vietnamese National Army in the early 1950s, under the French colonial administration, although he did as well. The generals were arrested and flown to My Khe beach, near Da Nang. He also had arrested Generals Ton That Dinh and Mai Huu Xuan, the interior minister and police chief respectively.37 Lan was also arrested as a suspected French agent.38 At the time, the generals were caught totally unaware. Minh, Don and Kim woke up to find hostile forces surrounding their houses and thought it to be a quixotic stunt by some disgruntled young officers.39
In his first radio broadcast upon seizing power, Khanh assailed the former regime for its performance during its three months at the top. He said &lt;U+201C&gt;The political, economic, and social situation in the countryside still offers no promising prospect. There has not been one single compensation worthy of the sacrifices accepted daily by the soldiers.&lt;U+201D&gt;40
Khanh also had Major Nguyen Van Nhung, the bodyguard of Minh, shot. Nhung was notable for his execution of Diem and his brother Ngo Dinh Nhu in the 1963 coup, as well the Diem loyalist Special Forces head Colonel Le Quang Tung. Khanh later spread stories that Nhung had committed suicided due to remorse at his executions of Diem, Nhu and Tung. Nhung had become a symbol of the removal of Diem, and his execution lead to fears that it would signal the return of Diem's policies and loyalists. This resulted in riots in Saigon, notably among Buddhists who feared that anti-Buddhist policies would be reintroduced.4142
Khanh swiftly attempted to cement his grip on power by announcing himself as the Head of State and as Chairman of the Military Revolutionary Council, replacing Minh. Minh had not been implicated in the alleged French neutralist plot. Khanh later managed to persuade Minh to remain as a figurehead Head of State. This was partly due to American pressure, reasoning that the popular Minh would be a unifying and stabilising factor in the new regime and that his cooperation would provide continuity. However, Khanh soon came to dominate the MRC. Khanh turned out to be far more politically astute and motivated than the previous junta, seeking out veteran Vietnamese politicians and technicians to create a new government. A week after coming to power, Khanh summoned Dr. Nguyen Ton Hoan, a Catholic who was one of the former leaders of the southern branch of the Dai Viet Quoc Dan Dang (Greater Vietnam Nationalist Party). Hoan had been exiled in Paris during the Diem era, but remained active, publishing a magazine and keeping up to speed with developments in Vietnam. Hoan had generated little popular following during his campaign for power in the 1940s and 1950s and was unable to form a government as prime minister when he returned. Khanh thereupon decided to act as both Prime Minister and Chairman of the reorganised MRC, which he expanded to include 17 generals and 32 further officers, giving a total of 50 members. Hoan was appointed as the first Deputy Prime Minister in charge of rural pacification. He was given control of five ministries including the Interior, National Defense and Rural Affairs and two special commissions, which were primarily engaged in consolidating the strategic hamlets of Ngo Dinh Nhu into the renamed New Rural Life Hamlets. A second Deputy Prime Ministerial post was given to Harvard trained banker and economist Nguyen Xuan Oanh, who was associaied to the Dai Viet. Oanh was charged with managing the finance and economy of the country. Mau was the third deputy, overseeing social and cultural affairs.4344
Khanh selected a cabinet of thirteen ministers and two Secretaries of State at Cabinet level and chose new provincial and district chiefs. He originally tried to include members of a variety of political and religious groups including representatives of the Cao Dai and Hoa Hao religious sects. The Cao Dai and Hoa Hao still had remnants of their private armies intact after their dismantling by Diem in 1955. Although Khanh insisted that he had no party affiliation, the orientation of his government was toward the Dai Viet Quoc Dan Dang, who held many of the key posts in the government. This provoked bitterness from other anti-Communist nationalists and groups that were banned under the Diem period and were seeking a greater role in the public life of South Vietnam,as well as from a younger generation who felt that the established nationalist parties were responsible for divisions in the country.45
Khanh promised that the village elections that were abolished under Diem would be held as soon as feasible and that a new National Assembly would be elected within a year. He started by abolishing the Council of Notables. Many Vietnamese and American observers considered this rash and premature, as promises of elections been frequently broken and that the council had at least been an effective forum for dissent in the absence of parliamentary representation.46
Minh resented that fact that he had been deposed by a younger officer who he viewed as an unscrupulous upstart. Minh was also upset with the detention of his fellow generals and around 30 of his junior officers. The junior officers were set free when Minh demanded that Khanh release them as a condition for him serving as a figurehead chief of state. Khanh attempted to avoid the issue of substantiating the alleged plot as long as he could,47 and then tried to revive it by claiming that French agents were attempting to assassinate him and renew their attempts to enforce neutralism. Khanh offered no evidence, only claiming that the French had paid a hitman USD1300 to kill him, before later inflating the supposed reward for his assassination. American intelligence officials in Vietnam said that they were not aware of any such threat.48
Trial
Khanh presided over their trial,49 which took place in May after prodding by the Americans.50 Minh was perfunctorily accused of misusing a small amount of money, before being allowed to serve as an advisor on the trial panel.5152
The generals were interrogated for five and a half hours, mostly about details of their coup against Diem, rather than the original charge of promoting neutralism. As all of the officers were involved in the plot against Diem, this did not reveal any new information. The court deliberated for over nine hours, and when it reconvened for the verdict, Khanh stated, &quot;We ask that once you begin to serve again in the army, you do not take revenge on anybody&quot;.53 The tribunal then &quot;congratulated&quot; the generals, but found that they were of &quot;lax morality&quot;, unqualified to command due to a &quot;lack of a clear political concept&quot;.54 They were chastised for being &quot;inadequately aware of their heavy responsibility&quot; and of letting &quot;their subordinates take advantage of their positions&quot;.55 They were allowed to remain in Da Lat under surveillance with their families.5657
All four were barred from commanding troops for a period; Kim was banned for six years, and Don 18 months. Offices were prepared for the quartet so that they could participate in &quot;research and planning&quot;.58 Worried that the group of idle generals would plot against him, Khanh made some preliminary arrangements to send the generals to the United States for military study, but this fell through.5960
Khanh's actions left divisions among the officers of the ARVN who became dissatisfied with him. When Khanh was himself deposed in 1965, he handed over dossiers proving that Don and the other generals were innocent.61 Robert Shaplen said that &lt;U+201C&gt;the case&lt;U+2026&gt;continued to be one of Khanh&lt;U+2019&gt;s biggest embarrassments&lt;U+201D&gt;.62
Notes
References
vi:&lt;U+0110&gt;&lt;U+1EA3&gt;o ch&lt;U+00ED&gt;nh Nam Vi&lt;U+1EC7&gt;t Nam n&lt;U+0103&gt;m 1964
Category:Conflicts in 1964 Category:Vietnam War Category:Military coups in South Vietnam Category:History of South Vietnam Category:1964 in Vietnam
Moyar, pp. 108–114.↩
Karnow, pp. 351–352.↩
Shaplen, p. 229.↩
Karnow, pp. 354–355.↩
Shaplen, p. 228.↩
Shaplen, p. 230.↩
Jones, p. 437.↩
Shaplen, p. 221.↩
Shaplen, p. 223.↩
Shaplen, p. 225.↩
Shaplen, p. 213.↩
Shaplen, pp. 221–224.↩
↩
Moyar, p. 294.↩
Shaplen, p. 231.↩
Shaplen, pp. 231–232.↩
Shaplen, p. 232.↩
Karnow, p. 352.↩
Langguth, p. 278.↩
Logevall, p. 161.↩
Logevall, p. 162.↩
Shaplen, p. 233.↩
Shaplen, p. 234.↩
Karnow, p. 354.↩
Langguth, p. 279.↩
Shaplen, pp. 236–237.↩
Karnow, p. 355.↩
Shaplen, p. 237.↩
Shaplen, pp. 238–239.↩
Langguth, pp. 289–291.↩
Shaplen, pp. 244–245.↩
Langguth, p. 347.↩
