William P. Hobby Airport  is named after former Texas governor William P. Hobby, receiving this name in 1967, and is located 7 miles (11 km) southeast of downtown Houston, in Harris County, Texas. Despite occasional claims of being the only U.S. commercial airport to be named after a woman, it was not named after Oveta Culp Hobby.
Hobby Airport is Houston's oldest commercial airport. It was the city's primary air terminal until the opening of George Bush Intercontinental Airport. Hobby is now Houston's secondary airport and mainly handles domestic service, particularly from one carrier, Southwest Airlines.
It was first called Houston Municipal Airport in 1937. It was named Howard R. Hughes Airport in 1938, but because the person was alive at the time and regulations at the time did not allow federal improvement funds for an airport named after a living person, the airport's name changed back to Houston Municipal.
In 1950, Pan Am started a Houston-Mexico City flight, and in 1954, the name was changed to Houston International Airport. KLM started Amsterdam operations in 1957. KLM later moved to Houston Intercontinental Airport (now George Bush Intercontinental Airport), where it remains today.
Houston Intercontinental Airport (now George Bush Intercontinental Airport) was built in 1969 because of expansion limitations at Hobby. All commercial aviation operations at Hobby were moved to Houston Intercontinental when the airport opened.
Hobby was reopened to commercial aviation in 1971.
Hobby has multiple low-fare carrier operations, as opposed to Bush Intercontinental Airport's hub operation with Continental Airlines. Business travellers on shorter routes to Houston from within the United States tend to prefer Hobby over Bush Intercontinental.
In a survey among travelers in the United States by J.D. Power and Associates for an Aviation Week traveler satisfaction report, passengers have selected William P. Hobby Airport as the number one airport in the country for customer satisfaction. 1
Recent developments at Hobby include a new concourse to serve Southwest Airlines and the upgrade of Runway 4/22.
Concourses
Hobby Airport has three concourses: A, C, and the new Central Concourse. All concourses are open as of October 2005. A major reconstruction program is underway to replace all three original concourses (A, B, and C). As of July 2006, Concourse B has been demolished to open up new gates on that side of the Central Concourse. Future plans call for Councourses A and C to be replaced with a new East Councourse to house all carriers except for Southwest.
Concourse A
Originally Southwest's center of operations at HOU, Concourse A currently serves as overflow for Southwest's Central Concourse. Plans call for Concourse A to be replaced with a new, modern East Concourse.
Southwest Airlines (Austin, Corpus Christi, Harlingen, San Antonio)
Concourse B
This concourse was demolished in the early 2000s to make room for additional gates on the Northeast side of the Central Concourse.
Central Concourse
Southwest Airlines main center of operations, the Central Concourse replaced Concourse C which allowed Concourse B airlines to move there and Concourse B to be demolished.
Southwest Airlines (Albuquerque, Baltimore/Washington, Birmingham (AL), Chicago-Midway, Dallas-Love, Denver, El Paso, Fort Lauderdale, Jackson (MS), Jacksonville, Las Vegas, Little Rock, Los Angeles, Midland/Odessa, Nashville, New Orleans, Oakland, Oklahoma City, Orlando, Philadelphia, Phoenix, St. Louis, Tampa, Tulsa)
Concourse C
Originally Southwest's Concourse A overflow, Concourse C currently houses all non-Southwest Airlines
AirTran Airways (Atlanta)
American Airlines (New York-LaGuardia)
AmericanConnection operated by Chautauqua Airlines (St. Louis)
AmericanConnection operated by Trans States Airlines (St. Louis)
American Eagle (Dallas/Fort Worth)
ATA Airlines (New York-LaGuardia)
Delta Air Lines (Atlanta)
Delta Connection operated by Atlantic Southeast Airlines (Atlanta)
Delta Connection operated by Shuttle America (Atlanta)
JetBlue Airways (New York-JFK)
Concourse Map
HOU.gif
Former airlines
Continental Airlines
KLM Royal Dutch Airlines
Midwest Airlines
Northwest Airlines
Pan American World Airways
Trans World Airlines
FAA Diagram
Hobby_copy.jpg
External links
Houston Airport System &lt;U+2014&gt; William P. Hobby Airport
sv:William P. Hobby Airport
Category:Houston, Texas   Category:Airports in Texas
