Port Metro Vancouver
PortMetroVan.png
General information
Founded
Former authorities prior to amalgamation
Coordinates
 - Latitude
 - Longitude
Area
 - Coastline
 - Land
 - Water
Major marine terminals
Vessel arrivals
(Placeholder)
Annual container volume
(Placeholder)
Annual cargo tonnage
(Placeholder)
Value of cargo handled
Cruise traffic
Gross Domestic Product (GDP)
Jobs
VFPA Board of Directors
Chairman
Vice chairman
Other board members
President and CEO
Official Website
Port Metro Vancouver is the new principal authority for shipping and port-related land and sea use in the Metro Vancouver region.
History
Prior to Merger
Prior to the formation of the new authority, there were three separate port authorities in the Metro Vancouver region: the Port of Vancouver, which was the largest port in Canada; the Fraser River Port Authority, and the North Fraser Port Authority.
Although the ports were able to financially support themselves, the federal legislation governing the authorities generated some inefficiency, as the port authorities, legally being separate entities, were forced to compete with each other economically for business. This inefficiency came to the attention of the local media in 2006 when it was found that the recently-expanded Fraser Surrey Docks, operated by the Fraser River Port Authority in North Delta, were sitting idle after their principal shipping partner, CP Ships, decided to relocate to the facilities of the Port of Vancouver when they were already nearing capacity. 1
Some, however, had opposed the possible merger as they feel the new authority will not recognize the unique concerns of the Fraser River. John Cummins, the Richmond East - Delta MP, has called the merger a &quot;sellout&quot; of the North Fraser River Authority to international shippers. 2
To increase efficiency of the ports of Vancouver, the federal Minister of Transport permitted the three authorities to do studies on the benefits of amalgamating the three separate authorities into one in June 2006. The resulting report highlighted several benefits of amalgamation, and in June 16, Transport Canada granted a &quot;certificate of intent to amalgamate port authorities&quot;. In December 21, 2007, the government of Canada published a certificate of amalgamation that allowed the three port authorities to merge into one effective January 1, 2008. 3
Post-Merger
Since the merger, the port authority has been embroiled in controversy in Mission, British Columbia over plans to build a barge container port on an environmentally-sensitive wetland. The port authority has admitted that such plans have existed prior to the merger and that they have not consulted the community beforehand. Proponents argue that the new terminal will reduce emissions and truck traffic throughout the region and ease capacity problems, while critics feel that the truck traffic may move all the way to Mission and cause traffic and environmental problems there. Many residents are also concerned that the container terminal will be unsightly. 4
References
fr:Port Metro Vancouver
Category:Transportation in Greater Vancouver Vancouver Category:Economy of Vancouver Category:Port authorities in Canada
1 Container docks in Surrey idle after $190m expansion - The Vancouver Sun↩
2 Port authorities set to amalgamate - Delta Optimist↩
3 About Us - Port Metro Vancouver↩
4 Mission port plan doesn't sail - Global↩
