The Roman province of Macedonia (, ) was officially established in 146 BC, after the Roman general Quintus Caecilius Metellus defeated Andriscus of Macedon, the last Ancient King of Macedon in 148 BC, and after the four client republics (&quot;tetrarchy&quot;) established by Rome in the region were dissolved. The province incorporated ancient Macedonia, with the addition of Epirus, Thessaly, and parts of Illyria, Paeonia and Thrace. This created a much larger administrative area, to which the name of 'Macedonia' was still applied.
Description
Organization
After the reforms of Diocletian in the late 3rd century, Epirus Vetus was split off, and sometime in the 4th century, the province of Macedonia itself was divided into Macedonia Prima in the south and Macedonia Salutaris in the north. These provinces were all subordinate to the Diocese of Macedonia, one of three dioceses which were included in the praetorian prefecture of Illyricum, organized in 318. When the Prefecture was divided between the Western and Eastern Empires in 379, the Macedonian provinces were included in Eastern Illyricum. With the permanent division of the Empire in 395, Macedonia passed to the East, which would evolve into the Byzantine Empire.
Epirus Vetus
Epirus vetus or Old Epirus was a province in the Roman Empire that corresponded to the region of Epirus. Between 146 BC and 395, it was incorporated into the Roman province of Macedonia.The capital1 of Epirus vetus was Nicopolis, a city founded by Octavian in memory of his victory over Antony and Cleopatra at Actium.
Epirus Nova
Epirus nova or New Epirus or Illyria Graeca234 or Illyris proper was a province of the Roman Empire established by Diocletian (284-311) during his restructuring of provincial boundaries. The province, belonged to the Roman province of Macedonia.56 Later it became a theme7 of the Byzantine empire. Dyrrachium (or Epidamnus) was established as the capital of Epirus nova.8 The region of Epirus Nova corresponded9 to a part of Illyria that was now was &quot;partly Hellenic and partly Hellenized&quot;.10 The area was the line of division11 between the provinces of Illyricum and Macedonia.The area suffered from terrible earthquakes.
The Ostrogoths led by Theodoric were stopped in Epirus nova by Sabinianus.12 They entered in 479, where they remained until 482.13 
Macedonia Prima
Macedonia Prima (&quot;first Macedonia&quot;) was a province encompassing most of the kingdom of Macedonia, coinciding with most of the modern Greek region of Macedonia, and had Thessalonica as its capital.
Macedonia Salutaris
Also known as Macedonia Secunda (&quot;second Macedonia&quot;) was a province encompassing partially Dardania and the whole of Paeonia, the second being most of the present-day Republic of Macedonia. The town of Stobi located to the junction of the Erig&lt;U+00F3&gt;n and Axi&lt;U+00F3&gt;s rivers, which was the former capital of Paeonia, arose later in the capital city of Macedonia Salutaris (&quot;advantageous Macedonia&quot;).
Economy
The reign of Augustus began a long period of peace, prosperity and wealth for Macedonia, although its importance in the economic standing of the Roman world diminished when compared to its neighbor, Asia Minor.
The economy was greatly stimulated by the construction of the Via Egnatia, the installation of Roman merchants in the cities, and the founding of Roman colonies. The Imperial government brought, along with its roads and administrative system, an economic boom, which benefited both the Roman ruling class and the lower classes. With vast arable and rich pastures, the great ruling families amassed huge fortunes in the society based on slave labor.
The improvement of the living conditions of the productive classes brought about an increase in the number artisans and craftspeople to the region. Stonemasons, miners, blacksmiths, etc. were employed in every kind of commercial activity and craft. Greek people were also widely employed as tutors, educators and doctors throughout the Roman world.
The export economy was based essentially on agriculture and livestock, while iron, copper, and gold along with such products as timber, resin, pitch, hemp, flax and fish were also exported. Another source of wealth was the kingdom's ports, such as Dion, Pella, Thessalonica, Cassandreia.14
The Roman empire under Hadrian (ruled 117-38), showing the senatorial province of Macedonia' in southeastern Europe
Notable individuals
Citizens
Damon of Thessalonica 2nd century BC
Saints and Clerics
Lydia of Thyatira, 1st century AD
Aristarchus of Thessalonica, 1st century
Epaphroditus, first bishop of Philippi
Gaius, first Bishop of Thessalonica
Onesimus, first bishop of Beroea
Agathopous, deacon
Theodulus, Lector
Matrona of Thessalonica
Agape, Chionia, and Irene(died 304)
Saint Demetrius, patron saint of the city of Salonika, martyred in 306.
Demophilus of Constantinople (died 386), Bishop, born in Thessalonica
Writers
Craterus of Amphipolis (c. 100-30 BC) Rhapsode winner in Amphiarian games15
Phaedrus of Pieria (c. 15 BC &lt;U+2013&gt; c. 50 AD), fabulist
Antipater of Thessalonica (late 1st century BC), epigrammatic poet and governor of the city
Philippus of Thessalonica (late 1st century AD), epigrammatic poet and compiler of the Greek Anthology
Archias, epigrammatist
Antiphanes (late 1st century), epigrammatist
Parmenio (late 1st century), epigrammatist
Criton of Pieria, historian
Polyaenus, (2nd century), military writer
Stobaeus (5th century), anthologist of Greek authors
Macedonius of Thessalonica (6th century), epigrammatist of Greek Anthology
Physicians
Athryilatus of Thasos
Alexander of Pella
Damian of Thessalonica
Anthemius of Edessa
Paul of Philippi
Theodorus of Kato Kleines,Florina
C. Iulius Nicetas of Lyke (Lyki) in Pella
Aurelius Isidorus of Thessalonica
Sextus Iulius Chariton of Amphipolis
Servia of Thessalonica
Pubicius Lalus and Publicius Hermias of Beroea
Aelius Nicolaus of Edessa
Aptus of Dion16
See also
Macedon
Diocese of Macedonia
Macedonia (region)
References
Category:Roman Macedonia   Category:Roman Albania Category:Roman Epirus Category:Roman Illyria Category:States and territories established in 146 BC Category:Ancient Roman provinces
The visible past: Greek and Roman history from archaeology 1960-1990 by Michael Grant, 1990, ISBN 0-684-19124-5, page 98↩
[http://penelope.uchicago.edu/Thayer/E/Roman/Texts/Procopius/Buildings/4B*.html The Loeb Editor's Notes], 28 Nova Epirus or Illyris Graeca↩
A new classical dictionary of Greek and Roman biography, mythology, and geography: partly based upon the Dictionary of Greek and Roman biography and mythology by Sir William Smith,1851,page 392↩
Catholic Encyclopedia - Durazzo↩
Handbook of Ancient Geography and History by Ptz Wilhelm, ISBN 1-113-19974-1, The (734) southern portion, or Illyria Graeca, belonged to the province of Macedonia.↩
Atlas of Classical History by R. Talbert, 1989, page 175: &quot;... divided the diocese of Moesia into two, styled Thracia and Macedonia, the latter consisting of the provinces from Epirus Nova and Macedonia southward. But there is evidence that Constantine considered ...&quot;↩
Encyclopedia of ancient Greece by Nigel Guy Wilson, 2006, ISBN 0-415-97334-1, page 246↩
Hendry, p. 299. The geography is entirely correct for Servius' time, since Diocletian's rearrangement of provincial boundaries included the creation of the province of Epirus Nova out of southern Illyricum with Dyrrachium (=Epidamnus) as its capital.↩
Wilkes, J. J. The Illyrians, 1992,ISBN 0-631-19807-5,Page 210↩
↩
Migrations and invasions in Greece and adjacent areas by Nicholas Geoffrey Lempri&lt;U+00E8&gt;re Hammond, 1976, ISBN 0-8155-5047-2, page 54: The line of division between Illyricum and the Greek area Epirus nova↩
A history of the Ostrogoths by Thomas S. Burns,1991,ISBN 0-253-20600-6,page 63↩
Epirus Vetus: The Archaeology of a Late Antique Province (Duckworth Archaeology) by William Bowden, 2003, ISBN 0-7156-3116-0, 2003, page 196↩
Macedonia - Province of the Roman Empire↩
Amphiareion &lt;U+2014&gt; c. 80-50 BC Epigraphical Database↩
*ref www.phl.uoc.gr/eulimene/eulimene03.pdf↩
