Laura Catherine Schlessinger (born January 16, 1947) is an American cultural and conservative commentator, most known as host of the popular Dr. Laura radio advice call-in show. The show is nationally syndicated and runs three hours a day on weekdays.
Schlessinger is an outspoken critic of practices that she feels have become too prevalent in contemporary American culture. These include: sex outside of marriage (sometimes referred to by her as &quot;screwing around&quot;), living together in uncommitted cohabitation before marriage (referred to by her as &quot;shacking up&quot;), intentional single parenthood, re-marrying while living with children from a first marriage, daycare in lieu of a parent staying home to raise their children, the viewing of pornography, the allowing of a schedule arrangement in which neither parent is home when children arrive home from school, marrying too quickly or out of desperation, permissive parenting (also known as laissez-faire parenting), abortion, euthanasia, easy or no-fault divorce, and same-sex marriage. Her radio program often features short editorial monologues on these and other social and political topics, followed by her characteristically direct responses to callers' questions and moral dilemmas. Certain aspects of feminism are often discussed on her show (Dr. Laura was a self-claimed feminist in the 1970s).
She has also authored numerous self-help books, including the best-selling Ten Stupid Things Women Do to Mess Up Their Lives, and several religious books. The Proper Care and Feeding of Husbands has been her most successful. Her books are both controversial and popular.
Personal history
Born in 1947 in Brooklyn, New York, to Monroe (Monty) Schlessinger and Yolanda Ceccovini Schlessinger. She was the fifth of six children, being the youngest child for eleven years until the birth of her younger sister, Cindy. Schlessinger grew up first in Brooklyn, then in Long Island, New York. She has described her childhood in a dysfunctional family as unpleasant, due to extended family rejection of her mixed-marriage parents (her father was a non-practicing Jew, while her mother was an Italian non-practicing Roman Catholic) and due to what she has described as an unloving environment.
An excellent student, Schlessinger received a bachelor degree from the State University of New York at Stony Brook and a Ph.D. in Physiology from Columbia University. A brief marriage in her early twenties ended in divorce, and she moved to Los Angeles where her parents had resettled.
Schlessinger received her certification in Marriage, Family, and Child Counseling from University of Southern California (USC) and taught at University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA), University of California, Irvine, and Pepperdine University. While working at USC, she met Dr. Lewis G. Bishop, who was married with dependent children. According to the subsequent divorce filings, they began an affair. They married eight years later, in early 1985, and he became her business manager. After the reversal of a tubal ligation, and later suffering an ectopic pregnancy, Schlessinger bore their only child, son Deryk, in November 1985, when she was 38.
Schlessinger began practicing Judaism in 1996, and she and her son Deryk joined the Conservative branch. (Schlessinger was of Jewish descent but had not been raised practicing the religion.) Then in 1998 the entire family converted to Orthodox Judaism under Rabbi Reuven P. Bulka of Ottawa, Ontario. Schlessinger sometimes discussed religion on the show, giving examples from Judaism in order to illustrate resolutions of moral dilemmas facing her callers, the vast majority of whom were not Jewish. She occasionally clarified ethical and moral issues with her local Orthodox Rabbi, Moshe D. Bryski, before mentioning them on the air. She was embraced by many in the politically conservative segment of Orthodox Judaism for bringing more awareness of Orthodoxy to her radio show. Schlessinger received a National Heritage award from the National Council of Young Israel in early 2001. Some of her expressed views were explicitly religious and found their way into her 1999 book The Ten Commandments: The Significance of God's Laws in Everyday Life, while many of her other views were purely secular in nature.
She has received awards from both media and conservative organizations, including the Marconi Award for Network/Syndicated Personality of the year, American Women in Radio &amp; Television's Genii Award and National Heritage Award, and the National Religious Broadcasters' Chairman's Award. She also lectures on the national conservative circuit, and was the commencement speaker at Hillsdale College in June, 2002. Her son matriculated there the following fall; he subsequently left college and joined the United States Army under its 18x Special Forces contract program.
In July 2003, Schlessinger announced on her show that she was no longer an Orthodox Jew. In a series of monologues over the next month, she explained that she did not feel a connection with God and felt frustrated by the effort she had put into following the religion. She also mentioned envying the relationship with God described by her Christian fans.
Radio show
Schlessinger's first radio engagement was as a call-in guest on the Bill Ballance show in 1974. Impressed by her quick wit and sense of humor, Ballance began featuring Schlessinger in a weekly segment. This was followed with her own shows on a series of small radio stations.
Her big break came in the late 1980s when she started filling in for Barbara De Angelis's nighttime relationship-oriented talk show in Los Angeles on KFI, considered by many to be a powerful and prestigious radio station. When De Angelis replaced noontime talk show host Toni Grant, Schlessinger got De Angelis's former nighttime time-slot. A few years later, De Angelis left the station, landing Schlessinger that coveted noontime time-slot. Her show became very popular, leading to its national syndication.
The Dr. Laura Show was nationally syndicated in 1994. Schlessinger has characterized her show as a &quot;moral health program&quot; rather than as an &quot;advice program&quot;. Her responses to callers usually display a trademark frankness and bluntness; she gets to the core of a caller's issue quickly rather than letting them talk for a long time. (Her approach has been likened to that of the highly successful Judge Judy television program.1) The Dr. Laura Show is tied for fourth highest-rated talk radio show in the United States. At its peak, it was the second-highest-rated radio show after The Rush Limbaugh Show and was heard on 471 radio stations. NewsMax.com Magazine's &quot;Top 25 Talk Radio Host&quot; list selected Schlessinger as the eighth most influential host in the nation.2
She sold ownership of the show to Jacor Communications, Inc. for $71 million. Jacor was then sold to Clear Channel Communications. KFI remains her flagship station but Schlessinger now broadcasts from her current home in Santa Barbara, California.
As of November 2003, her show is syndicated to 275 stations, down from its peak. Stations lost include ones such as the high-ratings, strong-signal WABC-AM 770 in New York3(it eventually resurfaced in New York on the low-visibility, Christian radio outlet WWDJ-AM 970 out of Hackensack, New Jersey). Much of the lost syndication came on the heels of conservative talk show host Sean Hannity, whose show debuted nationwide in 2001 in the same time slot (3 p.m. EST, 12 p.m. PST). As of Fall 2004, her audience is estimated at eight million listeners.4 As of 2005, her show also airs on XM Satellite Radio.
In September 2002, the industry magazine Talkers named Laura Schlessinger as the seventh greatest radio talk show host of all time.5 In April 2005, Schlessinger was nominated for induction into the Radio Hall of Fame6 but was not selected for induction that year.7
Television show
In 2000, Schlessinger signed a deal with Paramount Television to do a Dr. Laura television program. This deal came after years of stating she would not work with the company, due to its association with Howard Stern. Thousands of critics, led in part by gay activist groups such as the Stop Dr. Laura website, threatened to boycott sponsors in advance of the show because of her declarations in December of 1998 that homosexuals were &quot;biological errors&quot; and deviants.1 Potential advertisers then became skeptical of the show's prospects for success and reluctant to sponsor it. When the television show finally debuted in September 2000, many critics and viewers found it dull in format, failing to generate the energy and interest of her radio show.8 In October of 2000, she took out a full page ad in Variety magazine apologizing for some of her &quot;poorly chosen&quot; words about homosexuality.2 She stopped short of apologizing for the overall message of the comment, however, and repeated it (albeit more carefully worded) on later radio broadcasts.
The show started with low ratings which then declined, and by November 2000, most television stations moved the show to a less desirable time slot or replaced it entirely. Furthermore, sponsors showed little interest in the show during its first nine weeks. The show was canceled in March 2001 due to poor ratings.9
Publications
Schlessinger has published a number of books. Several follow the mold of her successful Ten Stupid Things Women Do to Mess Up Their Lives, with similarly named books giving advice for men, couples, and parents, others are more religious or moral in orientation. The later advice books emphasize religion more than the earlier works, until her announced departure from Orthodox Judaism in July, 2003.
Her recent book, The Proper Care and Feeding of Husbands, has sold well. Many calls to the radio show discuss the new book and Schlessinger often refers to it. This latest work is a departure from her previous advice books - which tended to focus on pre-marital relationships and children. Proper Care asserts that men need direct communication, respect, appreciation, food and good loving rather than tearing down the husband's sense of strength and importance. Her thesis is that wives have the power to change their husbands' attitudes by seeing to these needs, and then their husbands will &quot;swim across shark infested waters to bring you lemonade.&quot; The book proposes that wives have the power to prompt devotion, compassion and love from their husbands. Critical reviews have been dismissive, but sales remain strong.
Advice Books
Ten Stupid Things Women Do to Mess Up Their Lives, February 1994
Ten Stupid Things Men Do to Mess Up Their Lives, September 1997
portions repackaged as Damsels, Dragons, &amp; Regular Guys, March 2000
Parenthood by Proxy: Don't Have Them if You Can't Raise Them, April 2000
repackaged as Stupid Things Parents Do to Mess Up Their Kids, January 2001
Ten Stupid Things Couples Do to Mess Up Their Relationships, January 2002
The Proper Care and Feeding of Husbands, January 2004
Woman Power, July 2004 (a workbook to use with Proper Care...)
''Bad Childhood Good Life: How to Blossom and Thrive in Spite of an Unhappy Childhood '', January 2006
The Proper Care and Feeding of Marriage, January 2007
Religious Books
How Could You Do That?! The Abdication of Character, Courage, and Conscience, January 1996
The Ten Commandments: The Significance of God's Laws in Everyday Life with Rabbi Stuart Vogel, August 1998
Children's Books, with Martha Lewis Lambert, illustrated by Dan McFeely
Why Do You Love Me?, April 1999
But I Waaannt It!, April 2000
Growing Up is Hard, April 2001
Where's God?, April 2003
For several years, Schlessinger published a full-color 16 page monthly magazine, The Dr. Laura Perspective, but it has ceased publication.
She wrote a syndicated weekly column, carried in many newspapers as well as Jewish World Review, where archives are still available. She currently writes a monthly column for World Net Daily.
On July 29, 2006, it was announced she would be signed on as a columnist to the Santa Barbara News-Press replacing notable former columnist Barney Brantingham. This news came weeks after an incident at the News-Press led to the resignation of many top profile editors and columnists including Brantingham. Her column will be on Thursdays and Sundays, and focus largely on local Santa Barbara region affairs.
Foundation
Schlessinger created The Dr. Laura Foundation, which helps abused and neglected children, in 1998. Schlessinger asks her on-air audience to donate items for &quot;My Stuff&quot; bags which go to children in need (often children who must leave their home with no possessions). All other donations comes from other people or groups, usually in the form of donated items for the bags. Per the foundation's reports, money not used for operations is directed toward pro-life organizations such as crisis pregnancy centers.
In September 2004, Schlessinger announced she was closing down the foundation by the end of the year. Her reason for ending the foundation's work, as given on her website and in an announcement to listeners, was to support adoption and abstinence.
Opinions
Schlessinger often expresses her opinions on social topics during her radio program. Some are considered common sense: exercise personal responsibility, do not spend more than you have, do not become romantically involved with people who are clearly untrustworthy, leave abusive relationships immediately, and so forth.
Other opinions voiced are more controversial. Both Schlessinger's supporters and critics have noted that her advice is often very strict and uncompromising, and that every situation always has a &quot;right&quot; and a &quot;wrong&quot; response. Schlessinger generally believes that the &quot;right&quot; response is right for all people, and that certain standards of moral conduct are likewise always right or wrong, with no middle ground; she contrasts this (rightly or wrongly) with moral relativism and situational ethics.
The following are some of the opinions that she has stated on the air at least ten times (when a year appears in parentheses after, it denotes the first time she publically expressed that opinion, and that she did not address it prior to that year):
Children should be put in day care only if absolutely no other options exist.
Most two-paycheck couples work for luxury goods, not survival.
&quot;Stay-at-home&quot; moms make the best parents (she did not always use these particular words, though).
Before children enter school, either the mother or the father should stay at home. After the children are school-age, at least one parent should be home before the children arrive home from school.
Divorce, when there are children, should not occur without the presence of Abuse, Addiction, or Adultery (her &quot;three A's&quot;).
Don't forgive those who wronged you unless they evince Remorse, Responsibility, and Repair (her &quot;three R's&quot;).
Live-in arrangements outside marriage (&quot;shack-ups&quot;) are immoral.
Couples who lived together before marrying are more likely to divorce (this statistic is a fact, but some researchers consider its use in this context to be an example of the fallacy that correlation implies causation).
Women who engage in sex outside marriage are &quot;presenting themselves virtually as unpaid whores.&quot;
All contraception is unreliable. Therefore, couples should abstain from sex outside of marriage.
Teenage girls who wear croptops and other revealing outfits are &quot;sluts&quot;, and the outfits themselves are &quot;sluttaceous&quot; (using a neologism probably coined by Sean Hannity). (1998)
Dating should not begin until age 17 or 18.
Couples should not marry until their late 20s.
Pre-marriage engagements should be lengthy. Couples should not marry unless they have been in a courtship relationship for at least 2 years.
Parents who have divorced should not remarry until all children are over 18.
Adoption: Two-parent heterosexual families should be given priority, but single adults and gay couples have been supported on the show to adopt older and hard to place children. It's in the best interest of all children to have a stay-at-home parent.
Abortion constitutes murder, and should be performed only in the case of the &quot;last exception&quot;, when the life of the mother is in danger. (1996)
Has criticized the pro-choice movement, especially Planned Parenthood.
The National Education Association and the American Library Association want to allow children to access explicit materials online.
Nude Pictures Scandal
On October 19, 1998, a web site called ClubLove posted nude photos of Schlessinger taken in the 1970s by then boyfriend and supervisor, Bill Ballance, with whom she had an affair. At first, Schlessinger denied the pictures were of her, but later secretly filed a copyright infringement suit against IEG, the publisher of the web site that hosted the images. In doing so, Schlessinger tacitly admitted the authenticity of the pictures. IEG prevailed in the suit, and the photos remain on the site.
Criticisms
Name of show and qualifications
Schlessinger's Ph.D. is in physiology (not psychology), and some critics have characterized the show's name as deceptive.
Although she has mentioned that her degree is in physiology and that she was a licensed marriage therapist (now expired) on her web site and during her show, critics contend that she rarely mentions these facts on her show. Of note, however, Schlessinger never makes psychiatric diagnoses and commonly will recommend that callers or their loved ones undergo psychological or psychiatric assessment in order to make informed decisions as they relate to issues of mental health. She has referred to her marriage and family therapy training on the air, but has never referred to herself as a psychologist. She frequently advocates a strict adherence to a daily exercise program and offers other insights into physiological issues that speak to her academic background and credentials.
She says that she does not perform &quot;therapy&quot; and often refers people to seek therapy outside the context of her show. She has received additional criticism because her California Marriage Family and Child Counseling (MFCC) license has been inactive for several years.(CA MFCC License Search Page) Further criticism arises because she often refers to herself as &quot;a licensed therapist.&quot;
Criticism of methods and standards
Schlessinger's current advocacy of high moral standards is often contrasted by critics with her past, given that:
While in her 20s and still married to somebody else, she posed nude for a boyfriend and supervisor, Bill Ballance, who in 1998 posted the pictures on the Internet.10
Supporters counter that:
These events (excepting her conversion to and departure from Judaism) occurred before Schlessinger adopted and began speaking about her later moral views.
They give her &quot;real world&quot; experience - she knows what she's talking about.
Detractors mention them because they fit their personal agenda of impeaching her as a moral authority.
People often do stupid things in their teens and 20s, and later mature.
Schlessinger has often said that a hypocrite says &quot;Do what I say, not what I do&quot; rather than, as she says, &quot;Do what I say, not what I did.&quot;11
In December 2002, Schlessinger's mother Yolanda was found dead in her condominium, her body having been there for months.
On Thursday, June 1st 2006, she mentioned on the program that, in light of Wendy McElroy's recent article12 she had in the past sobbed over the &quot;unfair&quot; allegations of homophobia her critics had leveled against her (see below).
View of homosexuality
Prior to 1997, Schlessinger was very supportive to gay callers during the show. In those years, she took issue with Christian religious leaders who were opposed to gay relationships, and said that it was cruel to deny love and happiness to gay couples. She renounced this view in 1997 and embraced the opposite view. Soon, her monologues approvingly mentioned groups who claimed they could help homosexuals &quot;turn&quot; heterosexual, and she attacked the American Psychological Association for condemning their stance. Schlessinger also began citing Harvard, MIT and UT educated psychiatrist, Dr. Jeffrey Satinover.13
Afterward, Schlessinger was frequently criticized in the gay community for her view of homosexuality as a &quot;biological error&quot; and for her opposition to adoption by same-sex couples.
GLAAD began monitoring Schlessinger's on-air comments about homosexuality, posting weekly transcripts of relevant shows on their web site in a section entitled &quot;Defamation and the 'Dr' &quot;14
On December 8, 1998 she stated:
I'm sorry — hear it one more time, perfectly clearly: If you're gay or a lesbian, it's a biological error that inhibits you from relating normally to the opposite sex. The fact that you are intelligent, creative and valuable is all true. The error is in your inability to relate sexually intimately, in a loving way to a member of the opposite sex — it is a biological error.
On, May 10, 2000, The Canadian Broadcast Standards Council (CBSC) ruled that
her consistent characterization (in episodes reviewed) of the sexual behavior of gays and lesbians as &quot;abnormal&quot;, &quot;aberrant&quot;, &quot;deviant&quot;, &quot;disordered&quot;, &quot;dysfunctional&quot;, and &quot;an error&quot; constituted abusive discrimination on the basis of their sexual orientation. As a result, Schlessinger's comments were determined to be in violation of the human rights provision of the CAB Code of Ethics.
The CBSC found similar fault with her generalized statements that pedophilia is more prevalent among members of the gay community. However, the CBSC also ruled that,
in a number of other areas complained of, notably the issues relating to the gay agenda, gay culture, fatherless homes and the issues surrounding the murder of Matthew Shepard, Schlessinger's comments could not reasonably be interpreted on these various episodes as being in violation of either Clause 2 or 6 of the CAB Code of Ethics.15
Schlessinger attempted to repair the breach with the gay community without success. Her March 2000 public apology on her radio show was withdrawn two weeks later when it was not whole-heartedly accepted. In October 2000, Schlessinger paid for a full-page ad in the &quot;Gay Hollywood&quot; issue of Variety, as a Yom Kippur apology for previous negative remarks.
In her book The New Thought Police: Inside the Left's Assault on Free Speech and Free Minds (Prima, 2001), for which Laura Schlessinger wrote the foreword, author Tammy Bruce treats the issue of Dr. Laura's relationship with the gay community at length. Bruce, who is herself a lesbian, criticizes some gay activists' treatment of Dr. Laura as not only misrepresenting her position as &quot;hate speech,&quot; but also as unjustly suppressing her freedom of speech.
In response to her comments about homosexuality, a letter was circulated circa 2000 on the internet showing an apparent fallacy in Dr. Laura's argument that the Bible declares homosexuality to be a sin.16 This letter was the inspiration for the character Jenna Jacobs on The West Wing episode &quot;The Midterms&quot; in season 2 where President Bartlet criticizes Jacobs for using the Bible to call homosexuality evil.17 Christian apologist Hank Hanegraaff responded to the West Wing episode, stating that &quot;Rather than fall for the rhetoric and emotive stereotypes such as those presented by NBC, we must commit ourselves to becoming so familiar with the truth that when such counterfeits loom on the horizon, we recognize them instantaneously. &quot; 18
Dr. Laura in Pop Culture
In the sixth season of the TV show Frasier, Dr. Laura was parodied in an episode called &quot;Dr. Nora&quot; (played by Christine Baranski). The Dr. Nora character, with biographical details similar to that of Schlessinger, is hired by Frasier to follow up his show on the radio. However, Dr. Nora has a very biting tone, telling a woman who was sleeping with a man before marriage to &quot;keep your knees together.&quot; Dr. Laura had originally sponsored Frasier, but publicly pulled her support from the show because she disagreed with the series' tacit endorsement of pre-marital sex.
Dr. Laura was depicted in an episode of Celebrity Deathmatch in a fight against famous lesbian Ellen Degeneres. In the fight Dr. Laura was beaten up held upside down causing her brain to fall out and die losing the fight4.
In November 1997 the popular webcomic Sluggy Freelance introduced Dr. Lorna, a parody of Dr. Laura.
In the cartoon Queer Duck, she is portrayed as a raging homophobe.
In a second-season episode of the television show The West Wing entitled &quot;The Midterms&quot;, Dr. Laura is parodied as the fictional character Dr. Jenna Jacobs, especially in a conversation with President Bartlet revolving around her academic qualifications and the consequences of a literal interpretation of Leviticus regarding homosexuality - referring to Dr. Laura's characterization of homosexuality as a &quot;biological error.&quot;19
Appeared as herself in the 1992 Episode &quot;Roberto!&quot; of Quantum Leap as a guest on a talk show.
Is a known Star Trek fan, has a large original Star Trek collection, mentioned this on her show.
In a Halloween episode of the Simpsons Bart and Homer find themselves with her on a spaceship headed for the sun. Also on board are Courtney Love, Pauly Shore and Tom Arnold.
Catchphrases and quotations
&quot;I am my kid's mom.&quot; - said at the beginning of every show after introducing the rest of the support staff.
&quot;I'm Doctor Laura Schlessinger and I do welcome you to this hour of program. You are here with Benjamin Pratt, engineers and orchestrates our music; Kimberly Neill, produces and screening your calls and me -- proud mother of an American paratrooper (or occasionally 'soldier'). Hou-ah!&quot; - stated at the beginning of each hour of her program, after her son enlisted. In prior years, the engineer and producer were different, and they would be mentioned during the introduction, but without the military introduction.
&quot;I brought my son up to be a warrior.&quot;
&quot;I think what he's doing is so important, and so noble, that I'm willing to face what I need to face. I'm so proud to have produced someone with such character &lt;U+2013&gt; willing to put his life on the line.&quot;
&quot;It goes on and says 'Pedophilia and child molestation have zero to do with being gay, homosexual orientation' and that&lt;U+2019&gt;s not true. That is not true. How many letters have I read on the air from gay men who acknowledge that a huge portion of the male homosexual populace is predatory on young boys.&quot; - quoted by Canadian Broadcast Standards Council
&quot;The debate over gay rights. Rights. Rights? For sexual deviancy, sexual behavior, there are no rights.&quot; - a 1999 show
&quot;I was an 'original' feminist who wanted to improve the status of women, not the 'modern' feminist who shouts 'men are monsters' &quot;.
&quot;Now, it's late! Go to bed!&quot; - said to close every show (very early years, when her was a local evening program on KFI Los Angeles).
&quot;Now, go take on the day!&quot; - said to close every show (early years).
&quot;Now, go do the right thing!&quot; - said on the show's bottom of every hour and to close every show (later years).
&quot;The National Organization of 'I don't know what kind of' Women&quot; - referring to the feminist group NOW.
&quot;Be the kind of person YOU would want to come home to.&quot;
&quot;Think of ways every day to make the other person's life worth living.&quot;
Notes
External links
Dr. Laura's website
alt.radio.talk.dr-laura (Usenet); show summaries, transcripts, links
StopDrLaura.com - the group that organized the advertising boycott of Dr. Laura's TV show (no longer an active group)
Dr. Laura monthly columns at World Net Daily
Dr. Laura columns at Jewish World Review (inactive)
Dr. Laura columns at TownHall.com (inactive)
Forward article on Schlessinger dropping Orthodox Judaism
Dr. Laura on Tourette Syndrome
FOXNews.com - Foxlife - Dr. Laura Tells Women: Just Do It
Salon Technology|Dr. Laura targets the new Sodom: Libraries
Dr. Laura controversial Biography
Beliefnet: Why Dr. Laura Dumped Judaism
Dr. Laura Naked - Criticism of Dr. Laura.
An Email to Dr. Laura Schlessinger Satirical blog entry regarding Dr. Laura's apparent hypocrisy in moral teaching.
Celebrity Deathmatch fightagainst Ellen Degeneres
Don't Listen to Dr. Laura. Her advice is unsound, hypocritical, and cruel.
da:Laura Schlessinger de:Laura Schlessinger yi:&lt;U+05DC&gt;&lt;U+05D0&gt;&lt;U+05D5&gt;&lt;U+05E8&gt;&lt;U+05E2&gt; &lt;U+05E9&gt;&lt;U+05DC&gt;&lt;U+05E2&gt;&lt;U+05D6&gt;&lt;U+05D9&gt;&lt;U+05E0&gt;&lt;U+05D2&gt;&lt;U+05E2&gt;&lt;U+05E8&gt;
Schlessinger, Laura Schlessinger, Laura Schlessinger, Laura Schlessinger Schlessinger, Laura Schlessinger, Laura Schlessinger, Laura Schlessinger, Laura Schlessinger, Laura Schlessinger, Laura Schlessinger, Laura Schlessinger, Laura Schlessinger, Laura Schlessinger, Laura
Wired News: Attack of the Killer Shrews - November 10, 1998↩
Top 25 Talk Radio Host↩
Dr. Laura's Star Falling - David Hinckley, New York Daily News, May 2002↩
The Talk Radio Research Project - Talkers Magazine, Fall 2005 UNIQ54f83ad26595edfd-HTMLCommentStrip3300b5d85beb13bc00000002↩
Talkers Greatest 25 - September 2002↩
National Radio Hall of Fame Announces 2005 Nominees - April 12, 2005↩
National Radio Hall of Fame Names Class of 2005 - August 8, 2005↩
A Case of the Creeps: 'Dr. Laura' on UPN Looks Better on Radio - Tom Shales, Washington Post, September 15, 2000↩
CBS shoves Dr. Laura into late night slots, or dumps her - CNN, November 7, 2000↩
Dr. Laura Dishes on Nude Photos - Marcus Errico, E!, November 4, 1998↩
(see 3) Dr. Laura - NPR interview, October 3, 1998↩
http://www.foxnews.com/story/0,2933,197550,00.html↩
http://www.slate.com/?id=2098↩
http://www.glaad.org/action/campaigns_detail.php?id=3307&amp;↩
Feature Film Strip Tease Breaches No Broadcast Codes, Says Broadcast Standards Council - Canadian Broadcast Standards Council, May 2000↩
Letter to Dr. Laura about homosexuality and the Bible↩
The Midterms West Wing Episode↩
[http://www.equip.org/free/DP801.htm, President Bartlet's Fallacious Diatribe, Christian Research Journal, volume 23, number 3 (2001).↩
Asymmetrical Information blog - March 14, 2003↩
