Brighton Chamber Choir is a Brighton based Choir of around 35-40 SATB voices singing a wide range of sacred and secular works from  Gregorian chant to  Broadway Musicals. The choir enjoys charitable status.1 and is a member of the National Federation of Music Societies2
History
In 1990 Brighton Chamber Choir3 was founded by Guy Richardson4 who also directed the Brighton Youth Choir. Originally Brighton Chamber Choir sang alongside the Brighton Youth Choir and it was not until 1991 that Brighton Chamber Choir gave it's first 'solo' performance.
From 1995 until 2001, renowned tenor, Neil Jenkins5 assumed the mantle of music director and reinforced the choir's aim &quot;to develop, improve and promote choral music to the widest possible audience&quot;.
Paul Brough took up the baton from 2001 until 2004 and under Paul's guidance, the choir commissioned and gave the first performance of
Sir John Tavener's Butterfly Dreams6
For a short time Christopher Larley followed Paul Brough as music director..
Since 2005 Jane Money7 has been music director. A T Nail8 is assistant director.
 Sir Simon Rattle is President of the choir. Choir chairman is Tony Hawkey.
Repertoire And Highlights
Brighton Chamber Choir performs both unaccompanied and with organ, piano or chamber orchestra. Their repertoire of sacred and secular music ranges from the Renaissance to present day. A complete list of concerts since 1995 is available here.
Brighton Chamber Choir has performed live on Classic FM and each May takes part in the Brighton Festival Fringe and the  Clifton,  Montpelier, Powis Festival (CMP).9
The choir also has performed at the Brighton Early Music Festival at Danny House, Hurstpierpoint, at Nymans Gardens for the National Trust and in the Royal Pavilion, Brighton for the Lord Mayor's Music Evening.
In 2010 the choir gave another first performance - Requiem, composer A T Nail.10 and in 2011 Requiem was recorded professionally by the choir..
Brighton Chamber Choir celebrated it's twentieth anniversary in 2010 with a performance of Bach's Mass In B Minor at  St Michael and All Angels Church, Brighton with London's Linden Baroque Orchestra.11
The choir has given support to charities, notably The Martlets Hospice,12  Diabetes UK and  St Dunstans.
Premieres
1997 Neil Jenkins'13 new editions of the Sch&lt;U+00FC&gt;tz Christmas Story and Resurrection Story.
2004 Sir John Tavener's Butterfly Dreams.14
2010 Requiem, composer A T Nail15
2010 Guy Richardson's16 setting of There Be None of Beauty's Daughters (Lord Byron)
Concert Venues
Brighton Chamber Choir performs regularly at the following venues:
 St Bartholomew's Church, Brighton 
 Brighton Friends Meeting House 
 Church of the Good Shepherd, Brighton 
 Church of the Sacred Heart, Hove 
 Church of St Michael and All Angels, Brighton 
 St Nicholas' Church, Brighton 
 St Paul's Church, Brighton 
 Church of St Margaret, Rottingdean 
Funding And Administration
Brighton Chamber Choir is a not-for-profit organisation which enjoys charitable status.17 Choir funding has two main sources, members' subscriptions (payable quarterly) and ticket revenue from choir concerts.
In accordance with the Brighton Chamber Choir constitution,18 management of the choir is undertaken by an executive committee of six choir members. The officers and committee members are elected by and out of the choir members each year at the Annual General Meeting. No person to whom the choir pays fees is eligible to serve on the committee.
References
External Links
Brighton Chamber Choir
Register of Charities
National Federation of Music Societies
CMP Festival
Guy Richardson
Neil Jenkins
Sir John Tavener
London's Linden Baroque Orchestra.
The Martlets Hospice
    Category:English choirs Category:Vocal music Category:Brighton Category:Culture in Brighton and Hove
1 Register of Charities↩
2 National Federation Of Music Societies.↩
3 Brief History Of Brighton Chamber Choir↩
Guy Richardson↩
Neil Jenkins↩
Sir John Tavener↩
Jane Money↩
A T Nail↩
CMP Festival↩
Requiem, Composer A T Nail↩
London's Linden Baroque Orchestra.↩
The Martlets Hospice.↩
Neil Jenkins - Conductor↩
Butterfly Dreams↩
Requiem composer A T Nail↩
Guy Richardson↩
4 Register of Charities↩
5 Brighton Chamber Choir Constitution↩
