The Battle of Haram or Chramon (modern Nova Palanka) was fought between the forces of King Stephen II of Hungary and Emperor John II Komnenos of the Byzantine Empire in the year 1128, or possibly earlier - in 1125 (the chronology is uncertain), in what is now Serbia, and resulted in a major defeat for the Hungarians.
Background
John II was married to the Hungarian princess Piroska, and this involved him in the dynastic struggles of the Kingdom of Hungary. In giving asylum to &lt;U+00C1&gt;lmos, a blinded claimant to the Hungarian throne, John aroused the suspicions of the King Stephen II of Hungary. John refused a demand from Stephen that &lt;U+00C1&gt;lmos be surrendered to him. The Hungarians, led by the king, then crossed the Danube frontier and invaded Byzantium's Balkan provinces. Most authorities place this event in 1127, with hostilities lasting until 1129; however, an alternative chronology has been suggested with the Hungarian attack and Byzantine retaliation taking place in 1125 with a renewal of hostilities in 1126.123 The Hungarians attacked Belgrade, Nish and Sofia; John, who was near Philippopolis in Thrace, counterattacked, supported by a naval flotilla operating on the River Danube.45
Battle
After a challenging campaign, the details of which are obscure, the John II managed to defeat the Hungarians and their Serbian allies at the fortress of Haram or Chramon, which is modern Nova Palanka. Haram was located on the Hungarian bank of the Danube. The Hungarian army, under a commander named Setephel as King Stephen was ill, had entrenched itself, defending the line of the Danube.6 The Byzantine historian John Kinnamos describes John II employing a ruse to allow his army to cross the river. He sent a mercenary force composed of Lombard (Italian) knights and Turks (probably horse archers) to threaten a crossing upstream, while he stayed on the shore opposite Haram with the rest of his army. The ruse worked as his army crossed the river at Haram by boat, the emperor himself on board the imperial trireme. The Byzantine cavalry then, &quot;with couched lances, scattered the assembled Hungarian forces.&quot;7 Many Hungarian troops were killed when a bridge they were crossing collapsed as they were fleeing from the Byzantine attack.8. The Byzantines took Haram, and other Hungarian fortified settlements in the area, and collected a great deal of plunder. The action has been described as a &quot;bloody battle&quot; and a great defeat for the Hungarians.9
Aftermath
John launched a punitive raid against the Serbs, who had dangerously aligned themselves with Hungary, many of whom were rounded up and transported to Nicomedia in Asia Minor to serve as military colonists. This was done partly to cow the Serbs into submission (Serbia was, at least nominally, a Byzantine protectorate), and partly to strengthen the Byzantine frontier in the east against the Turks. The Serbs were forced to acknowledge Byzantine suzerainty once again.10
In Hungary the defeat at Haram undermined Stephen II's authority and he faced a serious revolt when two counts named Bors and Ivan were declared kings. Both were eventually defeated, Ivan being beheaded and Bors fleeing to Byzantium.11
Following this the Hungarians renewed hostilities, possibly in order that King Stephen could be seen to reassert his authority, by attacking the Byzantine frontier fortress of Brani&lt;U+010D&gt;evo, which was immediately rebuilt by John. Further Byzantine military successes &lt;U+2013&gt; Choniates mentions several engagements &lt;U+2013&gt; resulted in a restoration of peace.12 The Byzantines were confirmed in their control of Brani&lt;U+010D&gt;evo, Belgrade and Zemun and they also recovered the region of Sirmium (called Frangochorion in Choniates), which had been Hungarian since the 1060s. The Hungarian pretender &lt;U+00C1&gt;lmos died in 1129, removing the major source of friction.13
Notes
Sources
Primary
Kinnamos, John (John Cinnamus), Deeds of John and Manuel Comnenus, trans. Charles M. Brand. Columbia University Press, 1976.
Secondary
Angold, Michael, (1997) The Byzantine Empire 1025&lt;U+2013&gt;1204, a political history, Longman, (Second Edition)
Fine, John, V.A. (1983), The Early Medieval Balkans, Ann Arbor.
Makk, Ferenc (1989) trans. Gyorgy Novak, The Arpads and the Comneni - Political Relations between Hungary and Byzantium in the 12th Century, Budapest.
See also
Komnenian Byzantine army
Category:Battles involving the Byzantine Empire Category:Komnenos dynasty Category:12th century in Serbia Category:Battles involving Hungary Category:Battles involving Serbia in the Middle Ages Category:History of Vojvodina Category:History of Syrmia Category:1120s conflicts
Angold, p. 154↩
Fine, pp. 235-236↩
Note:The primary Byzantine sources, Kinnamos and Choniates, give little detail about this campaign, no dates are specified, and what they do say differs considerably. The chronology presented here, 1127-1129, follows that of Angold and other scholars, Fine has the events taking place earlier, in 1125-1126.↩
Choniates, p. 11↩
Angold, p. 154↩
Makk, pp. 24-25↩
Choniates, pp. 11-12↩
Kinnamos, p. 18↩
Makk, p. 25↩
Angold, p. 153↩
Makk, pp. 25-26↩
Choniates, pp. 11-12↩
Fine, p. 235↩
