Eliane Chappuis, Model, Actress, Singer, Producer was born in 1978 at the Queen of Angels Hospital in Hollywood, to Swiss-French-Vietnamese parents. When six months old, her parents decided to raise her in Bern, Switzerland, where she spent her childhood with her siblings. At thirteen years of age she already played violin and had the Honor to perform under the conduct of Sir Yehudi Menuhin in the orchestra of the conservatory during his visits to Switzerland. She began her acting career at the theatre stage in High School and later attended the National Academy of Acting in Zurich.
In 1996 Eliane returned to the United States at 18 years of age, where she was invited to attend Robert Redford's Sundance Institute Workshop and assisted on film projects like Tony Bui's &quot;Saigon Stories&quot; (aka Three Seasons 1999).&quot; This put Eliane's desire on fire to be in film
Following the Sundance Institute workshop she traveled to Germany, to act the lead role in the television film &quot;Streets of Berlin&quot;(1998) Episode 1 &quot;Die Mandarine von Mahrzahn&quot;, in the role of Vu Thi Hartmann. Since then, Eliane has appeared in a couple of independent films, such as &quot;Soundman&quot; (1998) by Steven Ho, &quot;Facade&quot;(1999) and &quot;On the Roof&quot; (2002), in which she played the lead role. She also had some further appearances in &quot;Kilimanjaro: How To spell Love! (2001) a funny comedy by Swiss Film director Mike Eschmann (Ready, Steady, Charlie!) and Martin Scorsese's Gangs of New York (2002), released by Miramax Films. She speaks English, French, Vietnamese, Swiss-German and German. In the meantime Eliane Chappuis is also performing as a Singer. Her first pop songs released in June 2009 and in the following autumn her single &quot;Christmas Time&quot; got released by Fern Music (UK). It got good critics in the English Press and got broad casted by BBC Radio 2 before Christmas 2009.
References
Eliane Chappuis Films on www.imdb.com
elianechappuis.ch/bio Website
fern-music.com eliane-chappuis article
Daily Mirror Dec 11. 2009
Eliane Chappuis on I-Tunes
Category:1978 births Category:Living people Category:Swiss female singers Category:Swiss film actors Category:Swiss television actors
