&quot;Back to the Woods&quot; is a season six episode of the FOX animated series Family Guy that aired on February 17, 2008. There are special guest voices done by James Woods and Barry Manilow as themselves and Dave Van Dam portrays his role as David Letterman from The Howard Stern Show. The episode is a sequel to the episode &quot;Peter's Got Woods&quot;.
Plot
After attending a Barry Manilow concert with his friends, Peter realizes that he has accidentally dropped his wallet there. However, he soon discovers that someone has found it, and is currently using his credit card to buy expensive things. After receiving a bank statement, Peter and Brian track the culprit to a Chinese restaurant and discover him to be James Woods. Naturally, Woods is bitter towards Peter and, having stolen his wallet, is purchasing expensive items as part of his plan for revenge. Peter and Brian return home to find Woods there again, having claimed property of his house and possessions with the documents in Peter's wallet. Woods calls Joe over to remove Peter from &quot;his&quot; house. The Griffins are outraged by this, but Joe has no other choice but to abide his request now that Woods has stolen Peter's identity; he even refers to Woods as &quot;Peter&quot;. Woods has successfully stolen everything Peter has.
The Griffins are resentful of Woods for what he has done, especially Lois and Brian, eventually chaining Brian to a post outside. Unfortunately, Peter is forced to stay off of Woods' property (since Woods is armed with a shotgun). As Woods tries to weasel his way into the Griffins' lives, Peter and Brian move into a hotel together, with Peter swearing to return to Lois. Peter attempts to sneak into the house, disguising himself as Chris' friend from school. His happy yet secret reunion with Lois is cut short, unfortunately, as his identity is revealed to the suspicious Woods after he tricks Peter into taking off his hat. Peter begins to despair until Brian points out that Peter can assume Woods' identity himself and get revenge on him.
Stewie helps forge a fake ID card for Peter, which he uses to convince the general public that he is James Woods. Live on The Late Show with David Letterman he makes several inconsiderate remarks that ruin Woods' reputation, such as mentioning that he is starring in a comedy based on 9/11 called September 11, Two-Thousand FUN!. His remarks outrage the American people and a riot is shown on the news destroying Woods' house. Woods is furious and confronts Peter to settle their conflict once and for all, only to have Peter and Brian lure him into an alley with a trail of Reese's Pieces and trap him in a crate again; Peter, in a rare moment of hindsight, tells Brian that they should do this immediately should Woods ever return again, since he's already fallen for it twice. Peter reunites with Lois and the rest of his family, and Lois asks Peter what happened to Woods. Peter tells her that Woods has been sent to be studied by &quot;top men&quot; again, actually being returned to the warehouse.
Reception
The reaction to the episode was mixed overall. Most critics pointed out the cliched plot details. This episode was watched by 7.2 million and had a 3.6/8 audience share.1
References
External links
Category:Family Guy episodes: Season 6 Category:2008 television episodes
Error↩
