This article presents background and information on '' People of New York State v. Brooklyn Cooperage Company and Cornell University, ''a key early conservation court battle concerning forestry and logging practices in the Adirondack Park. The case involved Cornell University, New York State, constitutional lawyer Louis Marshall, and others in the first decade of the 20th century.
Background
In 1898, The New York State Legislature legislature, responding to an initiative by Governor Frank S. Black, approved establishment of the New York State College of Forestry at Cornell. As part of the legislation, Cornell University was authorized to purchase a tract of forest land in the Adirondacks from funds, previously appropriated for the acquisition of lands to be held &quot;forever wild&quot; in the Adirondack Forest Preserve,1, with Cornell holding title, possession, management, and control for 30 years. After 30 years, the land would revert to the State.2
Dr. Bernhard E. Fernow, Chief of the U.S. Department of Agriculture's Division of Forestry and one of the top forestry experts in the country, was recruited to be the first Dean of the new college. He moved quickly to acquire a tract to serve as a demonstration forest, purchasing  of forested Adirondack land near Axton, the site of an old lumber settlement originally called Axe-town, in Franklin County, New York.
Contract with the Brooklyn Cooperage Company
Fernow's plan called for clearcutting the tract at the rate of several thousand acres per year to prepare for planting conifers. With an annual state appropriation for the college of only $10,000, Cornell entered into a contract with the Brookyn Cooperage Company for the project to be viable. Under terms of the contract, the firm was to take the logs and cordwood from the forest land for a 15-year period. (In the 1890s, the more valuable red spruce trees had been logged, leaving primarily northern hardwoods.) Fernow had a -long railroad spur built from Axton to Tupper Lake in order to deliver logs to the Brooklyn Cooperage Company facility. The company turned the hardwood logs into barrels and the cordwood into methanol and charcoal, through a process called destructive distillation.
The contract proved to be profitable and beneficial only for the company. To his credit, Fernow established the first tree nursery in New York State at Axton. But Cornell gained insufficient funds to fully replant the clear-cut areas. Most of the non-native conifer species that were planted, such as scotch pine and norway spruce, did not do well for many years, with a denuded area as a result.
Rise of opposition
The demonstration forest, near Saranac Lake, in the Adirondacks drew heated opposition from neighboring land owners.3 Smoke from the burning of brush and logging slash, along with Fernow's disposition toward landowners from nearby Saranac Lake further alienated the public.4
Fernow's actions drew criticism also from Adirondack guides such as Ellsworth Petty (father of Clarence Petty), who protested the plan and, in a letter writing campaign, successfully lobbied the State to assign a special &quot;Committee of the Adirondacks&quot; to tour the Axton site. In its findings, the commission concluded that &quot;the college has exceeded the original intention of the State when the tract was granted the university for conducting silvicultural experiments.&quot;5
Lawsuit, trial, decision, and appeal
A lawsuit was filed, naming Cornell University and the Brooklyn Cooperage Company as defendants with the People of New York State as plaintiff. It was officially entitled, People of New York State v. Brooklyn Cooperage Company and Cornell University.
During the Brooklyn Cooperage trial in 1910, a forester on Chief Pinchot's staff, Charles S. Chapman, testified on behalf of the plaintiff. He testified that between the two silvicultural methods that might have been adopted&lt;U+2014&gt;the &quot;selection system&quot; of choosing individual trees for felling or the &quot;clear cutting&quot; and replanting system&lt;U+2014&gt;&quot;Fernow had erred in changing to the clear cutting and replanting method.&quot;6
In June 1910, Brooklyn Cooperage and Cornell lost the lawsuit. Upon hearing of the court's decision, Louis Marshall remarked, &quot;I hold before me the decision in the case of the People against the Brooklyn Cooperage Company ... the consequence of that (its contract with the University [Cornell] which agreed to cut logs and cord wood and deliver at its own expense) was that this 'tremendous' tract of thirty thousand acres was to be cut down 'flat' from one end of it to the other, in order that the scientific foresters might start a new forest which might mature a hundred years from the time that that contract was entered into. This is scientific forestry?&quot;78 In other words, the idea, to destroy a forest in order to save it, is abominable.9
The defendents appealed, losing again two years later, on March 19, 1912.10
Implications
The lawsuit and its aftermath defined forestry in the United States for a generation. The  of forest lands were placed under the &quot;forever wild&quot; protection of the Adirondack Forest Preserve.
References
Category:History of New York Category:Conservation in the United States Category:Forestry in the United States Category:Adirondack Park Category:New York State College of Forestry Category:Cornell University
Donaldson, Alfred Lee. 1921. A history of the Adirondacks, Volume 2. Century Co.↩
Chapter 122 of the Laws of 1898.↩
, pp.202-207.↩
Gove, B. 2005. Logging railroads of the Adirondacks. Syracuse University Press. pp. 176-181.↩
Christopher, Angus. 2002. The Extraordinary Adirondack Journey of Clarence Petty, p 31. Syracuse University Press ISBN 0-81560741-5↩
Rodgers, Andrew Denny III. 1951. Bernhard Eduard Fernow: A Story of North American Forestry. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, p. 371.↩
Quoted in Reznikoff, Charles, ed. 1957. Louis Marshall, Champion of Liberty: Selected Papers and Addresses. Philadelphia: Jewish Publication Society of America, p. 1020.↩
http://www.protectadks.org/data/content/view/38/39/↩
http://www.nytimes.com/2009/12/20/opinion/20heinrich.html↩
, p.206.↩
