Kam Kardashian is an American web series created by Fawzia Mirza, which premiered on February 14, 2012, via Youtube. Filmed in Chicago, IL, the comedic show chronicles the day to day adventures of Kameron (Fawzia Mirza),1 the fictional long-lost lesbian sister from a very famous family, and her best friend Mary Hollis (Mary Hollis Inboden). The show is directed by Ryan Logan and shot by Amanda Clifford. 2 In January 2013, it announced it would return for season two after a successful Kickstarter campaign,3 premiering in mid-March.
Plot
Kam Kardashian is a web series that follows Kameron, the fictional long-lost lesbian Kardashian sister who was cut off, kicked out, and left to fend for herself. This sticky-fingered vixen loves whiskey and women, and most of all: yearns to re-insert herself into the Kardashian krown by any means possible (whether it be through petty crime, Photoshop, or her slightly unbalanced best friend, Mary Hollis).
Cast
Fawzia Mirza as Kam Kardashian
Mary Hollis Inboden as BFF (Mary Hollis), Kam's Best Friend
Mark Ratermen as Mark
Joel Kim Booster as Joel, GLAWD's Unpaid Intern (Announced for Season 2)
Episodes
Season 1
Episode 1, The Gay One
Episode 2, Haircut
Episode 3, BFF
Episode 4, Hustlin'
Season 2
Episode 1, Orange You GLAWD (You're Not Kam Kardashian)
Impact and reception
Critical reaction
While fundraising for Season 2, Indiewire named Kam Kardashian Project of the Week. 4 Tubefilter chided, &quot;For my money, Kam is more worthwhile than any of her sisters.&quot; 5 Curve (magazine) said, &quot;Mirza and Logan collectively add something flavorful and relevant to the evolution of gay characters simply being themselves and doing regular things&quot;. 6 Placevine raves, &quot;While I can't tell if it's entirely scripted or totally improv (always a good sign of quality acting and direction), it's hilarious... star Fawzia Mirza makes it all seem so fresh, especially with its uniquely LGBTQ spin.&quot; 7
Series intent
After debuting the satirical comedy, the creators of the show addressed their intent. &quot;One thing that was really important... was not to do &quot;mean-spirited&quot; comedy,&quot; says Mirza, who ultimately respects the famous family for their savvy &quot;force in popular culture.&quot; And considering the Kardashians frequently wind up as the butt of a joke (no pun intended) on late-night television, it was important to establish a character in Kam Kardashian that made sense to anyone watching it.8
Director, Ryan Logan, commented, &quot;At the end of the day, Kam is just trying to live up to her family's legacy and gain her parents' approval. We can all identify with that. Hers just happens to be the most famous family on the planet. She's flawed and, compared with her family and &quot;proper society&quot; at large, stratospherically an outsider.&quot; 9
References
External links
Official Website
Kam Kardashian on Youtube
Category:Reality television series parodies Category:YouTube series
Sarah Terez-Rosunblum, &quot;Who's That Kardashian?&quot;, Chicago Sun-Times, January 6, 2013↩
Dan Avery, &quot;Meet Kam Kardashian, Kim's Older, Dykier Sister&quot;, Queerty, June 23, 2012↩
Kam Kardashian Season 2 Kickstarter Campaign↩
&quot;Congrats to 'Kam Kardashian,' Indiewire's Project of the Week!&quot;, Indiewire, January 9, 2013↩
Sam Gutelle, &quot;Kam Kardashian is Kim's Jaded Lesbian Sister&quot;, Tubefilter, January 2, 2013↩
Kim Hoffman, &quot;Kim Kardashian: The Lesbian Sister They Didn't Tell You About&quot;, Curve Magazine↩
&quot;Daily Scoop: Kam Kardashian, Placevine↩
Ryan Logan, &quot;Sugar, Spice, and Everything Nice: The Recipe for Making a Gay Celebrity, The Huffington Post, January 4, 2013↩
