Enos the space chimp before insertion into the Mercury-Atlas 5 capsule in 1961.
Animal testing or animal research is the use of non-human animals in scientific experimentation. It is estimated that 50 to 100 million vertebrate animals worldwide — from zebrafish to non-human primates — are used annually.1 Although much larger numbers of invertebrates are used and the use of flies and worms as model organisms is very important, experiments on invertebrates are largely unregulated and not included in statistics. Most animals are euthanized after being used in an experiment. Sources of laboratory animals vary between countries and species; while most animals are purpose-bred, others may be caught in the wild or supplied by dealers who obtain them from auctions and pounds.2
The research is conducted inside universities, medical schools, pharmaceutical companies, farms, defense establishments, and commercial facilities that provide animal-testing services to industry.3 It includes pure research such as genetics, developmental biology, behavioural studies, as well as applied research such as biomedical research, xenotransplantation, drug testing and toxicology tests, including cosmetics testing. Animals are also used for education, breeding, and defense research.
The topic is highly controversial. Supporters of the practice, such as the British Royal Society, argue that virtually every medical achievement in the 20th century relied on the use of animals in some way,4 with the Institute for Laboratory Animal Research of the U.S. National Academy of Sciences arguing that even sophisticated computers are unable to model interactions between molecules, cells, tissues, organs, organisms, and the environment, making animal research necessary in some areas.5 The U.S. and British governments both support the advancement of medical and scientific goals using animal testing, provided that the testing minimizes animal use and suffering.67 Opponents, such as the British Union for the Abolition of Vivisection, question the necessity of it, arguing further that it is cruel, poor scientific practice, never reliably predictive of human metabolic and physiological specificities, poorly regulated, that the costs outweigh the alleged benefits, or that animals have an intrinsic right not to be used for experimentation.
&quot;Animals Used for Experimentation FAQs&quot;,People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals;
&quot;UK Legislation: A Criticism&quot;, and &quot;FAQs: Vivisection&quot;, British Union for the Abolition of Vivisection;
&quot;Animal experimentation issues&quot;, Physicians Committee for Responsible Medicine;
Croce, Pietro. Vivisection or Science? An Investigation into Testing Drugs and Safeguarding Health. Zed Books, 1999.
Definitions
The terms animal testing, animal experimentation, animal research, in vivo testing, and vivisection have similar denotations but different connotations. Literally, &quot;vivisection&quot; means the &quot;cutting up&quot; of a living animal, and historically referred only to experiments that involved the dissection of live animals. The term is now used to refer to any experiment using living animals; for example, the Encyclopaedia Britannica defines &quot;vivisection&quot; as: &quot;Operation on a living animal for experimental rather than healing purposes; more broadly, all experimentation on live animals.&quot;8 For others, the word has a pejorative connotation, implying torture and suffering.9 The word &quot;vivisection&quot; is preferred by those opposed to this research, whereas scientists typically use the term &quot;animal experimentation.&quot;1011
History
 The earliest references to animal testing are found in the writings of the Greeks in the second and fourth centuries BCE. Aristotle (&lt;U+0391&gt;&lt;U+03C1&gt;&lt;U+03B9&gt;&lt;U+03C3&gt;&lt;U+03C4&gt;&lt;U+03BF&gt;&lt;U+03C4&gt;&lt;U+03AD&gt;&lt;U+03BB&gt;&lt;U+03B7&gt;&lt;U+03C2&gt;) (384-322 BCE) and Erasistratus (304-258 BCE) were among the first to perform experiments on living animals.12 Galen, a physician in second-century Rome, dissected pigs and goats, and is known as the &quot;father of vivisection.&quot;13
Animals have been used throughout the history of scientific research. In the 1880s, Louis Pasteur convincingly demonstrated the germ theory of medicine by inducing anthrax in sheep.14 In the 1890s, Ivan Pavlov famously used dogs to describe classical conditioning.15 Insulin was first isolated from dogs in 1922, and revolutionized the treatment of diabetes.16 On November 3, 1957, a Russian dog, Laika, became the first of many animals to orbit the earth. In the 1970s, a treatment of leprosy was developed in armadillos,17 then given to humans. The ability of humans to change the genetics of animals took a large step forwards in 1974 when Rudolf Jaenisch was able to produce the first transgenic mammal, by integrating DNA from the SV40 virus into the genome of mice.18 This genetic research progressed rapidly and, in 1996, Dolly the sheep was born, the first mammal to be cloned from an adult cell.19  Toxicology testing became important in the 20th century. In the 19th century, laws regulating drugs were lax. For example, in the U.S., the government could only ban a drug after a company had been prosecuted for selling products that harmed customers. However, in response to a tragedy in 1937 where a drug labeled &lt;U+201C&gt;Elixir of Sulfanilamide&lt;U+201D&gt; killed 73 people, the U.S. congress passed laws that required safety testing of drugs, before they could be marketed.20 Similar laws soon followed in other countries.
The controversy surrounding animal testing dates back to the 17th century. In 1655, the advocate of Galenic physiology Edmund O'Meara said that &quot;the miserable torture of vivisection places the body in an unnatural state.&quot;2122 O'Meara and others argued that animal physiology could be affected by pain during vivisection, rendering results unreliable. There were also objections on an ethical basis, contending that the benefit to humans did not justify the harm to animals.23 Early objections to animal testing also came from another angle — many people believed that animals were inferior to humans and so different that results from animals could not be applied to humans.24
On the other side of the debate, those in favor of animal testing held that experiments on animals were necessary to advance medical and biological knowledge. Claude Bernard, known as the &quot;prince of vivisectors&quot;25 and the father of physiology — whose wife, Marie Fran&lt;U+00E7&gt;oise Martin, founded the first anti-vivisection society in France in 188326 — famously wrote in 1865 that &quot;the science of life is a superb and dazzlingly lighted hall which may be reached only by passing through a long and ghastly kitchen&quot;.27 Arguing that &quot;experiments on animals ... are entirely conclusive for the toxicology and hygiene of man...the effects of these substances are the same on man as on animals, save for differences in degree,&quot;28 Bernard established animal experimentation as part of the standard scientific method.29 In 1896, the physiologist and physician Dr. Walter B. Cannon said &lt;U+201C&gt;The antivivisectionists are the second of the two types Theodore Roosevelt described when he said, &lt;U+2018&gt;Common sense without conscience may lead to crime, but conscience without common sense may lead to folly, which is the handmaiden of crime.&lt;U+2019&gt; &lt;U+201D&gt;30 These divisions between pro- and anti- animal testing groups first came to public attention during the brown dog affair in the early 1900s, when hundreds of medical students clashed with anti-vivisectionists and police over a memorial to a vivisected dog.31  In 1822, the first animal protection law was enacted in the British parliament, followed by the Cruelty to Animals Act (1876), the first law specifically aimed at regulating animal testing. The legislation was promoted by Charles Darwin, who wrote to Ray Lankester in March 1871: &quot;You ask about my opinion on vivisection. I quite agree that it is justifiable for real investigations on physiology; but not for mere damnable and detestable curiosity. It is a subject which makes me sick with horror, so I will not say another word about it, else I shall not sleep to-night.&quot;3233 Opposition to the use of animals in medical research first arose in the United States during the 1860s, when Henry Bergh founded the American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals (ASPCA), with America's first specifically anti-vivisection organization being the American AntiVivisection Society (AAVS), founded in 1883. Antivivisectionists of the era generally believed the spread of mercy was the great cause of civilization, and vivisection was cruel. However, in the USA the antivivisectionists' efforts were defeated in every legislature, overwhelmed by the superior organization and influence of the medical community. Overall, this movement had little legislative success until the passing of the Laboratory Animal Welfare Act, in 1966.34
Care and use of animals
Regulations
The regulations that apply to animals in laboratories vary across species. In the U.S., under the provisions of the Animal Welfare Act and the National Institutes of Health's (NIH) Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals (the Guide), any procedure can be performed on an animal if it can be successfully argued that it is scientifically justified. In general, researchers are required to consult with the institution's veterinarian and its Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC), which every research facility is obliged to maintain.35 The IACUC must ensure that alternatives, including non-animal alternatives, have been considered, that the experiments are not unnecessarily duplicative, and that pain relief is given unless it would interfere with the study. Larry Carbone, a laboratory animal veterinarian, writes that, in his experience, IACUCs take their work very seriously regardless of the species involved, though the use of non-human primates always raises what he calls a &quot;red flag of special concern.&quot;36
Mice, rats, and birds are not included in the provisions of the Animal Welfare Act (though they are included in the Guide) and over the years, the definition of &quot;animal&quot; used by Congress and the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) has changed several times to ensure that certain animals are included in protective legislation and that others, particularly farm animals, are excluded.37
Numbers
 Accurate global figures for animal testing are difficult to obtain. The British Union for the Abolition of Vivisection (BUAV) estimates that 100 million vertebrates are experimented on around the world every year, 10–11 million of them in the European Union.38 The Nuffield Council on Bioethics reports that global annual estimates range from 50 to 100 million animals.
None of the figures, including those given in this article, include invertebrates, such as shrimp and fruit flies.39 Animals bred for research then killed as surplus, animals used for breeding purposes, and animals not yet weaned (which most laboratories do not count)40 are also not included in the figures.
According to the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA), the total number of animals used in that country in 2005 was almost 1.2 million,41 but this does not include rats and mice, which make up about 90% of research animals.4243 In 1995, researchers at Tufts University Center for Animals and Public Policy estimated that 14-21 million animals were used in American laboratories in 1992, a reduction from a high of 50 million used in 1970.44 In 1986, the U.S. Congress Office of Technology Assessment reported that estimates of the animals used in the U.S. range from 10 million to upwards of 100 million each year, and that their own best estimate was at least 17 million to 22 million.45
In the UK, Home Office figures show that nearly three million procedures were carried out in 2004 on just under the same number of animals.46 It is the third consecutive annual rise and the highest figure since 1992.47 Most animals are used in only one procedure: animals either die because of the experiment or are euthanized afterwards.4849 A &quot;procedure&quot; refers to an experiment that might last minutes, several months, or years. 
Species
*;Invertebrates  Although many more invertebrates than vertebrates are used, these experiments are largely unregulated by law. The most used invertebrate species are Drosophila melanogaster, a fruit fly, and Caenorhabditis elegans, a nematode worm. In the case of C. elegans, the worm's body is completely transparent and the precise lineage of all the organism's cells is known,50 while studies in the fly D. melanogaster can use an amazing array of genetic tools.51 These animals offer great advantages over vertebrates, including their short life cycle and the ease with which large numbers may be studied, with thousands of flies or nematodes fitting into a single room. However, the lack of an adaptive immune system and their simple organs prevent worms from being used in medical research such as vaccine development.52 Similarly, flies are not widely used in applied medical research, as their immune system differs greatly from that of humans,53 and diseases in insects can be very different from diseases in more complex animals.54
*;Rodents, fish, and rabbits  In the U.S., the numbers of rats and mice used is estimated at 20 million a year.55 Other rodents commonly used are guinea pigs, hamsters, and gerbils. Mice are the most commonly used vertebrate species because of their size, low cost, ease of handling, and fast reproduction rate.56 Mice are widely considered to be the best model of inherited human disease and share 99% of their genes with humans.57 With the advent of genetic engineering technology, genetically modified mice can be generated to order and can provide models for a range of human diseases.58  Nearly 200,000 fish and 20,000 amphibians were used in the UK in 2004.59 The main species used is the zebrafish, Danio rerio, which are translucent during their embryonic stage, and the African clawed frog, Xenopus laevis. Over 20,000 rabbits were used for animal testing in the UK in 2004.60 Albino rabbits are used in eye irritancy tests because rabbits have less tear flow than other animals, and the lack of eye pigment make the effects easier to visualize.61
*;Cats and dogs  Cats are most commonly used in neurological research. Over 25,500 cats were used in the U.S. in 2000, around half of whom were used in experiments that caused &quot;pain and/or distress&quot;.62
Dogs are widely used in biomedical research, testing, and education — particularly beagles, because they are gentle and easy to handle. They are commonly used as models for human diseases in cardiology, endocrinology, and bone and joint studies, research that tends to be highly invasive, according to the Humane Society of the United States.63 The U.S. Department of Agriculture's Animal Welfare Report for 2005 shows that 66,000 dogs were used in USDA-registered facilities in that year.64 In the U.S., some of the dogs are purpose-bred, while most are supplied by so-called Class B dealers licensed by the USDA to buy animals from auctions, shelters, newspaper ads, and who are sometimes accused of stealing pets.65 
*;Non-human primates  Non-human primates (NHPs) are used in toxicology tests, studies of AIDS and hepatitis, studies of neurology, behavior and cognition, reproduction, genetics, and xenotransplantation. They are caught in the wild or purpose-bred. In the U.S. and China, most primates are domestically purpose-bred, whereas in Europe the majority are imported purpose-bred.66 Rhesus monkeys, cynomolgus monkeys, squirrel monkeys, and owl monkeys are imported; around 12,000 to 15,000 monkeys are imported into the U.S. annually.67 In total, around 70,000 NHPs are used each year in the United States and European Union.6869 Most of the NHPs used are macaques;70 but marmosets, spider monkeys, and squirrel monkeys are also used, and baboons and chimpanzees are used in the U.S; in 2006 there were 1133 chimpanzees in U.S. primate centers.71 Notable studies on non-human primates have been part of the polio vaccine development, and development of Deep Brain Stimulation, and their current heaviest non-toxicological use occurs in the monkey AIDS model, SIV.727374
Sources
Animals used by laboratories are largely supplied by specialist dealers. Sources differ for vertebrate and invertebrate animals. Most laboratories breed and raise flies and worms themselves, using strains and mutants supplied from a few main stock centers.75 For vertebrates, sources include breeders who supply purpose-bred animals; businesses that trade in wild animals; and dealers who supply animals sourced from pounds, auctions, and newspaper ads. Animal shelters also supply the laboratories directly.76 Large centers also exist to distribute strains of genetically-modified animals; the National Institutes of Health '' Knockout Mouse Project'', for example, aims to provide knockout mice for every gene in the mouse genome.77
In the U.S., Class A breeders are licensed by the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) to sell animals for research purposes, while Class B dealers are licensed to buy animals from &quot;random sources&quot; such as auctions, pound seizure, and newspaper ads. Some Class B dealers have been accused of kidnapping pets and illegally trapping strays, a practice known as bunching.
Class B dealers, Humane Society of the United States.
Gillham, Christina. &quot;Bought to be sold&quot;, Newsweek, February 17, 2006.
&quot;Who's Who of Federal Oversight of Animal Issues&quot;, Aesop Project;
Salinger, Lawrence and Teddlie, Patricia. &quot;Stealing Pets for Research and Profit: The Enforcement (?) of the Animal Welfare Act&quot;, paper presented at the annual meeting of the American Society of Criminology, Royal York, Toronto, October 15, 2006;
Class B dealers, Humane Society of the United States;
Reitman, Judith. Stolen for Profit, Zebra 1995.
Moran, Julio. &quot;Three Sentenced to Prison for Stealing Pets for Research,&quot; L.A. Times, September 12, 1991. It was in part out of public concern over the sale of pets to research facilities that the 1966 Laboratory Animal Welfare Act was ushered in — the Senate Committee on Commerce reported in 1966 that stolen pets had been retrieved from Veterans Administration facilities, the Mayo Institute, the University of Pennsylvania, Stanford University, and Harvard and Yale Medical Schools.78 The USDA recovered at least a dozen stolen pets during a raid on a Class B dealer in Arkansas in 2003.79
Four states in the U.S. — Minnesota, Utah, Oklahoma, and Iowa — require their shelters to provide animals to research facilities. Fourteen states explicitly prohibit the practice, while the remainder either allow it or have no relevant legislation.80
In the European Union, animal sources are governed by Council Directive 86/609/EEC, which requires lab animals to be specially bred, unless the animal has been lawfully imported and is not a wild animal or a stray. The latter requirement may also be exempted by special arrangement.81 In the UK, most animals used in experiments are bred for the purpose under the 1988 Animal Protection Act, but wild-caught primates may be used if exceptional and specific justification can be established.8283 The United States also allows the use of wild-caught primates; between 1995 and 1999, 1,580 wild baboons were imported into the U.S. Over half the primates imported between 1995 and 2000 were handled by Charles River Laboratories, Inc., or by Covance, which is the single largest importer of primates into the U.S.84
Pain and suffering
The extent to which animal testing causes pain and suffering, and the capacity of animals to experience and comprehend them, is the subject of much debate.85
According to the U.S. Department of Agriculture, in 2006 about 670,000 animals (not including rats, mice, birds, or invertebrates) were used in procedures that did not include more than momentary pain or distress. About 420,000 were used in procedures in which pain or distress was relieved by anesthesia, while 84,000 were used in studies that would cause pain or distress that would not be relieved.86
In the UK, research projects are classified as mild, moderate, and substantial in terms of the suffering the researchers conducting the study say they may cause; a fourth category of &quot;unclassified&quot; means the animal was anesthetized and killed without recovering consciousness, according to the researchers. In December 2001, 39 percent (1,296) of project licenses in force were classified as mild, 55 percent (1,811) as moderate, two percent (63) as substantial, and 4 percent (139) as unclassified.87 Although there have been suggestions of systemic underestimation of procedure severity88
The idea that animals might not feel pain as human beings feel it traces back to the 17th-century French philosopher, Ren&lt;U+00E9&gt; Descartes, who argued that animals do not experience pain and suffering because they lack consciousness.8990 Bernard Rollin of Colorado State University, the principal author of two U.S. federal laws regulating pain relief for animals,91 writes that researchers continued remained unsure into the 1980s as to whether animals experience pain, and that veterinarians trained in the U.S. before 1989 were simply taught to ignore animal pain.92 In his interactions with scientists and other veterinarians, he was regularly asked to &quot;prove&quot; that animals are conscious, and to provide &quot;scientifically acceptable&quot; grounds for claiming that they feel pain.93 Carbone writes that the view that animals feel pain differently is now a minority view. Academic reviews of the topic are more equivocal, noting that although the argument that animals have at least simple conscious thoughts and feelings has strong support,94 some critics continue to question how reliably animal mental states can be determined.9596 The ability of invertebrate species of animals, such as insects, to feel pain and suffering is also unclear.9798
The defining text on animal welfare regulation, &quot;Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals&quot; defines the parameters that govern animal testing in the USA. It states &quot;The ability to experience and respond to pain is widespread in the animal kingdom...Pain is a stressor and, if not relieved, can lead to unacceptable levels of stress and distress in animals.&quot;99 The Guide states that the ability to recognize the symptoms of pain in different species is vital in efficiently applying pain relief and that it is essential for the people caring for and using animals to be entirely familiar with these symptoms. On the subject of analgesics used to relieve pain, the Guide states &quot;The selection of the most appropriate analgesic or anesthetic should reflect professional judgment as to which best meets clinical and humane requirements without compromising the scientific aspects of the research protocol&quot;. Accordingly, all issues of animal pain and distress, and their potential treatment with analgesia and anesthesia, are required regulatory issues in receiving animal protocol approval.
Euthanasia
There is general agreement that animal life should not be taken wantonly, and regulations require that scientists use as few animals as possible.100 However, policy makers consider suffering to be the central issue, and see animal euthanasia as a way to reduce suffering, while others, such as the RSPCA, argue that the lives of laboratory animals have intrinsic value.101 Regulations focus on whether particular methods cause pain and suffering, not whether their death is undesirable in itself.102 Researchers call the killing of laboratory animals after an experiment &quot;euthanasia&quot; — literally &quot;good death&quot; — a term applied to all animals, including the young and healthy, although the same term is used of human beings only when the death will end severe suffering that cannot otherwise be relieved.103 The animals are euthanized at the end of studies for sample collection or post-mortem examination; during studies if their pain or suffering falls into certain categories regarded as unacceptable, such as depression, infection that is unresponsive to treatment, or the failure of large animals to eat for five days;104 or when they are unsuitable for breeding or unwanted for some other reason.105
Methods of euthanizing laboratory animals are chosen to induce rapid unconsciousness and death without pain or distress.106 The methods that are preferred are those published by councils of veterinarians. The animal can be made to inhale a gas, such as carbon monoxide and carbon dioxide, by being placed in a chamber, or by use of a face mask, with or without prior sedation or anesthesia. Sedatives or anesthetics such as barbiturates can be given intravenously, or inhalant anesthetics may be used. Amphibians and fish may be immersed in water containing an anesthetic such as tricaine. Physical methods are also used, with or without sedation or anesthesia depending on the method. Recommended methods include decapitation (beheading) for small rodents or rabbits. Cervical dislocation (breaking the neck or spine) may be used for birds, mice, and immature rats and rabbits. Maceration (grinding into small pieces) is used on 1 day old chicks. High-intensity microwave irradiation of the brain can preserve brain tissue and induce death in less than 1 second, but this is currently only used on rodents. Captive bolts may be used, typically on dogs, ruminants, horses, pigs and rabbits. It causes death by a concussion to the brain. Gunshot may be used, but only in cases where a penetrating captive bolt may not be used. Some physical methods are only acceptable after the animal is unconscious. Electrocution may be used for cattle, sheep, swine, foxes, and mink after the animals are unconscious, often by a prior electrical stun. Pithing (inserting a tool into the base of the brain) is usable on animals already unconscious. Slow or rapid freezing, or inducing air embolism are acceptable only with prior anesthesia to induce unconsciousness.107
Research classification
Pure research
Basic or pure research investigates how organisms behave, develop, and function. Those opposed to animal testing object that pure research may have little or no practical purpose, but researchers argue that it may produce unforeseen benefits, rendering the distinction between pure and applied research — research that has a specific practical aim — unclear.108
Pure research uses larger numbers and a greater variety of animals than applied research. Fruit flies, nematode worms, mice and rats together account for the vast majority, though small numbers of other species are used, ranging from sea slugs through to armadillos.109
Examples of the types of animals and experiments used in basic research include:
Studies on embryogenesis and developmental biology. Mutants are created by adding transposons into their genomes, or specific genes are deleted by gene targeting.110111 By studying the changes in development these changes produce, scientists aim to understand both how organisms normally develop, and what can go wrong in this process. These studies are particularly powerful since the basic controls of development, such as the homeobox genes, have similar functions in organisms as diverse as fruit flies and man.112113
Experiments into behavior, to understand how organisms detect and interact with each other and their environment, in which fruit flies, worms, mice, and rats are all widely used.114115 Studies of brain function, such as memory and social behavior, often use rats and birds.116117 For some species, behavioral research is combined with enrichment strategies for animals in captivity because it allows them to engage in a wider range of activities.118
Breeding experiments to study evolution and genetics. Laboratory mice, flies, fish, and worms are inbred through many generations to create strains with defined characteristics.119 These provide animals of a known genetic background, an important tool for genetic analyses. Larger mammals are rarely bred specifically for such studies due to their slow rate of reproduction, though some scientists take advantage of inbred domesticated animals, such as dog or cattle breeds, for comparative purposes. Scientists studying how animals evolve use many animal species, including mosquitos, sticklebacks, and lampreys, to see how variations in where and how an organism lives (their niche) produce adaptations in their physiology and morphology.120
Applied research
Applied research aims to solve specific and practical problems. Compared to pure research, which is largely academic in origin, applied research is usually carried out in the pharmaceutical industry, or by universities in commercial partnerships. These may involve the use of animal models of diseases or conditions, which are often discovered or generated by pure research programmes. In turn, such applied studies may be an early stage in the drug discovery process. Examples include:
Genetic modification of animals to study disease. Transgenic animals have specific genes inserted, modified or removed, to mimic specific conditions such as single gene disorders, such as Huntington's disease.121 Other models mimic complex, multifactorial diseases with genetic components, such as diabetes,122 or even transgenic mice that carry the same mutations that occur during the development of cancer.123 These models allow investigations on how and why the disease develops, as well as providing ways to develop and test new treatments.124 The vast majority of these transgenic models of human disease are lines of mice, the mammalian species in which genetic modification is most efficient.125 Smaller numbers of other animals are also used, including rats, pigs, sheep, fish, birds, and amphibians.126
Studies on models of naturally occurring disease and condition. Certain domestic and wild animals have a natural propensity or predisposition for certain conditions that are also found in humans. Cats are used as a model to develop immunodeficiency virus vaccines and to study leukemia because their natural predisposition to FIV and Feline leukemia virus.127 Certain breeds of dog suffer from narcolepsy making them the major model used to study the human condition. Armadillos and humans are among only a few animal species that naturally suffer from leprosy; as the bacteria responsible for this disease cannot yet be grown in culture, armadillos are the primary source of bacilli used in leprosy vaccines.128
Studies on induced animal models of human diseases. Here, an animal is treated so that it develops pathology and symptoms that resemble a human disease. Examples include restricting blood flow to the brain to induce stroke, or giving neurotoxins that cause damage similar to that seen in Parkinson's disease.129 Such studies can be difficult to interpret, and it is argued that they are not always comparable to human diseases.130 For example, although such models are now widely used to study Parkinson's disease, the British anti-vivisection interest group BUAV argues that these models only superficially resemble the disease symptoms, without the same time course or cellular pathology.131 In contrast, scientists assessing the usefulness of animal models of Parkinson's disease, as well as the medical research charity The Parkinson's Appeal, state that these models were invaluable and that they led to improved surgical treatments such as pallidotomy, new drug treatments such as levodopa, and later deep brain stimulation.132133134
Xenotransplantation
Xenotransplantation research involves transplanting tissues, or organs from one species to another, as a way to overcome the shortage of human organs for use in organ transplants.135 Current research involves using primates as the recipients of organs from pigs that have been genetically-modified to reduce the primates' immune response against the pig tissue.136 Although transplant rejection remains a problem,137 recent clinical trials that involved implanting pig insulin-secreting cells into diabetics did reduce these people's need for insulin.138139
The British Home Office released figures in 1999 showing that 270 monkeys had been used in xenotransplantation research in Britain during the previous four years. Documents leaked from Huntingdon Life Sciences to The Observer in 2003 showed, between 1994 and 2000, wild baboons were imported to the UK from Africa to be used in experiments that involved grafting pigs' hearts and kidneys onto the primates' necks, abdomens, and chests. The Observer reports that some baboons died after suffering strokes, vomiting, diarrhea, and paralysis, while others died en route to the UK. The experiments were conducted by Imutran Ltd, a subsidiary of Novartis Pharma AG in conjunction with Cambridge University and Huntingdon Life Sciences. Novartis told the newspaper that developing new cures for humans invariably means experimenting on live animals.140
The newspaper also wrote that researchers were deliberately underestimating the suffering in order to obtain licences. A report from Imutran said: &quot;The Home Office will attempt to get the kidney transplants classified as 'moderate,' ensuring that it is easier for Imutran to receive a licence and ignoring the 'severe' nature of these programmes.&quot;141142
Toxicology testing
Toxicology testing, also known as safety testing, is conducted by pharmaceutical companies testing drugs, or by contract animal testing facilities, such as Huntingdon Life Sciences, on behalf of a wide variety of customers.143 According to 2005 EU figures, around one million animals are used every year in Europe in toxicology tests; which are about 10% of all procedures.144 According to Nature, 5,000 animals are used for each chemical being tested, with 12,000 needed to test pesticides.145 The tests are conducted without anesthesia, because interactions between drugs can affect how animals detoxify chemicals, and may interfere with the results.146  Toxicology tests are used to examine finished products such as pesticides, medications, food additives, packing materials, and air freshener, or their chemical ingredients. Most tests involve testing ingredients rather than finished products, but according to BUAV, manufacturers believe these tests overestimate the toxic effects of substances; they therefore repeat the tests using their finished products to obtain a less toxic label.147
The substances are applied to the skin or dripped into the eyes; injected intravenously, intramuscularly, or subcutaneously; inhaled either by placing a mask over the animals and restraining them, or by placing them in an inhalation chamber; or administered orally, through a tube into the stomach, or simply in the animal's food. Doses may be given once, repeated regularly for many months, or for the lifespan of the animal.
There are several different types of acute toxicity tests. The LD50 (&quot;Lethal Dose 50%&quot;) test is used to evaluate the toxicity of a substance by determining the dose required to kill 50% of the test animal population. This test was removed from OECD international guidelines in 2002, replaced by methods such as the fixed dose procedure, which use fewer animals and cause less suffering.148149 Nature writes that, as of 2005, &quot;the LD50 acute toxicity test ... still accounts for one-third of all animal [toxicity] tests worldwide.&quot;150  Irritancy is usually measured using the Draize test, where a test substance is applied to an animal's eyes or skin, usually an albino rabbit. For Draize eye testing, the recommended protocol involves observing the effects of the substance at intervals and grading any damage or irritation, but that the test should be halted and the animal killed if it shows &quot;continuing signs of severe pain or distress&quot;.151 The Humane Society of the United States writes that the procedure can cause redness, ulceration, hemorrhaging, cloudiness, or even blindness.152 This test has also been criticized by scientists for being cruel and inaccurate, subjective, over-sensitive, and failing to reflect human exposures in the real world.153 Although no accepted in vitro alternatives exist, a modified form of the Draize test called the low volume eye test may reduce suffering and provide more realistic results, but it has not yet replaced the original test.154
The most stringent tests are reserved for drugs and foodstuffs. For these, a number of tests are performed, lasting less than a month (acute), one to three months (subchronic), and more than three months (chronic) to test general toxicity (damage to organs), eye and skin irritancy, mutagenicity, carcinogenicity, teratogenicity, and reproductive problems. The cost of the full complement of tests is several million dollars per substance and it may take three or four years to complete.
These toxicity tests provide, in the words of a 2006 United States National Academy of Sciences report, &quot;critical information for assessing hazard and risk potential&quot;.155 However, as Nature reported, most animal tests either over- or underestimate risk, or do not reflect toxicity in humans particularly well.156 This variability stems from using the effects of high doses of chemicals in small numbers of laboratory animals to try to predict the effects of low doses in large numbers of humans.157 Although relationships do exist, opinion is divided on how to use data on one species to predict the exact level of risk in another.158
Products in Europe not tested on animals carry this symbol.
Cosmetics testing
Cosmetics testing on animals is particularly controversial. Such tests, which are still conducted in the U.S., involve general toxicity, eye and skin irritancy, phototoxicity (toxicity triggered by ultraviolet light) and mutagenicity.159
Cosmetics testing is banned in the Netherlands, Belgium, and the UK, and in 2002, after 13 years of discussion, the European Union (EU) agreed to phase in a near-total ban on the sale of animal-tested cosmetics throughout the EU from 2009, and to ban all cosmetics-related animal testing. France, which is home to the world's largest cosmetics company, L'Oreal, has protested the proposed ban by lodging a case at the European Court of Justice in Luxembourg, asking that the ban be quashed.160 The ban is also opposed by the European Federation for Cosmetics Ingredients, which represents 70 companies in Switzerland, Belgium, France, Germany and Italy.161
Drug testing
 Before the early 20th century, laws regulating drugs were lax. Nowadays all new pharmaceuticals undergo rigorous animal testing before being licensed for human use. Tests on pharmaceutical products involve:
metabolic tests, investigating pharmacokinetics - how drugs are absorbed, metabolized and excreted by the body when introduced orally, intravenously, intraperitoneally, intramuscularly, or transdermally.
toxicology tests, which gauge acute, sub-acute, and chronic toxicity. Acute toxicity is studied by using a rising dose until signs of toxicity become apparent. Current European legislation demands that &quot;acute toxicity tests must be carried out in two or more mammalian species&quot; covering &quot;at least two different routes of administration&quot;.162 Sub-acute toxicity is where the drug is given to the animals for four to six weeks in doses below the level at which it causes rapid poisoning, in order to discover if any toxic drug metabolites build up over time. Testing for chronic toxicity can last up to two years and, in the European Union, is required to involve two species of mammals, one of which must be non-rodent.163
efficacy studies, which test whether experimental drugs work by inducing the appropriate illness in animals. The drug is then administered in a double-blind controlled trial, which allows researchers to determine the effect of the drug and the dose-response curve.
Specific tests on reproductive function, embryonic toxicity, or carcinogenic potential can all be required by law, depending on the result of other studies and the type of drug being tested.
Education, breeding, and defense
Animals are also used for education and training; are bred for use in laboratories; and are used by the military to develop weapons, vaccines, battlefield surgical techniques, and defensive clothing.164 
There are efforts in many countries to find alternatives to using animals in education.165 Horst Spielmann, German director of the Central Office for Collecting and Assessing Alternatives to Animal Experimentation, while describing Germany's progress in this area, told German broadcaster ARD in 2005: &quot;Using animals in teaching curricula is already superfluous. In many countries, one can become a doctor, vet or biologist without ever having performed an experiment on an animal.&quot;166
Ethics
The ethical questions raised by performing experiments on animals are subject to much debate, and viewpoints have shifted significantly over the 20th century.167 There remain strong disagreements about which animal testing procedures are useful for which purposes, as well as disagreements over which ethical principles apply, and to which species of animals. The dominant ethical position, world-wide, is that achievement of scientific and medical goals using animal testing is desirable, provided that animal suffering and use is minimized.168 The British government has additionally required that the cost to animals in an experiment be weighed against the gain in knowledge.169
A wide range of minority viewpoints exist as well. The view that animals have moral rights (animal rights) is a philosophical position proposed by Tom Regan, who argues that animals are beings with beliefs, desires and self-consciousness.170 Such beings are seen as having inherent value and thus possessing rights. Regan still sees clear ethical differences between killing animals and killing humans, and argues that to save human lives it is permissible to kill animals. However, some such as Bernard Rollin have taken his position further and argue that any benefits to human beings cannot outweigh animal suffering, and that human beings have no moral right to use an individual animal in ways that do not benefit that individual.171 Another prominent position is articulated by Peter Singer, who sees no convincing reason to include a being's species in considerations of whether their suffering is important in utilitarian moral considerations.172 Although these arguments have not been widely accepted, in response to these concerns some governments such as the Netherlands and New Zealand have outlawed invasive experiments on certain classes of non-human primates, particularly the Great Apes.173174
Footage filmed by PETA inside Huntingdon Life Sciences showed staff mistreating beagles.
Prominent cases
Huntingdon Life Sciences
In 1997, People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals (PETA) filmed staff inside Huntingdon Life Sciences (HLS) in the UK, Europe's largest animal-testing facility, hitting puppies, shouting at them, and simulating sex acts while taking blood samples.175 The employees were dismissed and prosecuted, and HLS's licence to perform animal experiments was revoked for six months. Footage shot inside HLS in the U.S. appeared to show technicians dissecting a live monkey.176 (video) The broadcast of the undercover footage on British television in 1997 triggered the formation of Stop Huntingdon Animal Cruelty, an international campaign to close HLS, which has been criticized for its sometimes violent tactics. 
Dolly the sheep
In February 1997 a team at the Roslin Institute in Scotland announced the birth of Dolly the sheep, a ewe that had been cloned from tissue taken from another adult sheep.177 Dolly was produced through nuclear transfer to an unfertilised oocyte, and was the only lamb that survived from 277 attempts at this technique.178 Dolly appeared to be a normal sheep, living for six years and giving birth to several lambs, but was euthanized in 2003 after contracting a progressive lung disease.179 Although the production of Dolly was a scientific breakthrough, it was controversial, since it showed that not only could cloned animals be produced for use in farming,180 but also that it would now be, in principle, possible to clone a human being.181
Covance
In 2004, German journalist Friedrich M&lt;U+00FC&gt;lln shot undercover footage of staff in Covance, M&lt;U+00FC&gt;nster, Europe's largest primate-testing center, making monkeys dance in time to blaring pop music, handling them roughly, and screaming at them. The monkeys were kept isolated in small wire cages with little or no natural light, no environmental enrichment, and high noise levels from staff shouting and playing the radio182 (video). Primatologist Dr. Jane Goodall described the living conditions of the monkeys as &quot;horrendous.&quot; Primatologist Stephen Brend told BUAV that using monkeys in such a stressed state is &quot;bad science,&quot; and trying to extrapolate useful data in such circumstances an &quot;untenable proposition.&quot;183 Covance obtained a restraining order preventing M&lt;U+00FC&gt;lln from performing any further undercover research against the company for three years, and required him and PETA to turn over the material they obtained from Covance. PETA is further prevented from attempting to infiltrate Covance for five years.184 
University of Cambridge
The British Union for the Abolition of Vivisection (BUAV) raised concerns about primate experiments at the University of Cambridge in 2002. In a series of court cases, the BUAV alleged that monkeys had undergone surgery to induce a stroke, and were left alone after the procedure for 15 hours overnight. Researchers had trained the monkeys to perform certain tasks before inflicting brain damage and re-testing them. The monkeys were only given food and water for two hours a day, to encourage them to perform the tasks. The judge hearing BUAV's application for a judicial review rejected the allegation that the Home Secretary had been negligent in granting the university a license.
Laville, Sandra. &quot;Lab monkeys 'scream with fear' in tests&quot;, The Guardian, February 8, 2005.
&quot;Aspects of Non-human Primate Research at Cambridge University. A Review by the Chief Inspector&quot;, British Home Office, October 1, 2002.
&quot;The Queen on the application of THE CAMPAIGN TO END ALL ANIMAL EXPERIMENTS (trading as the British Union for the Abolition of Vivisection), High Court, April 12, 2005. The British government's chief inspector of animals conducted a review of the facilities and experiments. It concluded the veterinary input at Cambridge was &quot;exemplary&quot;; the facility &quot;seems adequately staffed&quot;; and the animals afforded &quot;appropriate standards of accommodation and care.&quot;185
Filmed inside the University of California, Riverside by the Animal Liberation Front; the device on the monkey's head is an ultrasonic sonar.
University of California, Riverside
One of the cases of alleged abuse involved Britches, a macaque monkey born in 1985 at the University of California, Riverside, removed from its mother at birth, and left alone with its eyelids sewn shut, and a sonar sensor on its head, as part of an experiment to test sensory substitution devices for blind people.186187 260 animals, including Britches, were stolen from the laboratories at the University of California, Riverside in a raid by the Animal Liberation Front.188 The university alleged that damage to the monkey's eyelids, caused by the sutures according to the ALF, had in fact been caused by an ALF veterinarian, and that the sonar device had been removed and re-attached by the activists.189 The ALF reported that Britches was later transferred to a sanctuary in Mexico. University officials reported that hundreds of thousands of dollars of damage was done by the theft, and by smashing laboratory equipment, and years of medical research were lost.190
Columbia University
CNN reported in October 2003 that a post-doctoral &quot;whistleblowing&quot; veterinarian at Columbia University approached the university's Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee about experiments being carried out by an assistant professor of neurosurgery, E. Sander Connolly. 2 Connolly was allegedly causing strokes in baboons by removing their left eyeballs and using the eye sockets to reach a critical blood vessel to their brains. A clamp was placed on the blood vessel until the stroke was induced, after which Connolly would try to treat the condition with an experimental drug. In a letter to the National Institute of Health, PETA cited the case of a baboon they said was unable to sit up or eat, and remained slouched over in its cage, before dying two days later.191 An investigation by the United States Department of Agriculture found the experiments did not violate federal guidelines. Connolly abandoned the research saying he felt under attack after receiving a threatening e-mail, but continued to believe his experiments were humane and potentially valuable.192
Threats to researchers
University of California, Los Angeles
In 2006, a primate researcher at the University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA) shut down the experiments in his lab after threats from animal rights activists. The researcher had received a grant to use 30 macaque monkeys for vision experiments; each monkey was paralyzed, then used for a single session that lasted up to 120 hours, and finally killed. The researcher's name, phone number, and address were posted on the website of the Primate Freedom Project. Demonstrations were held in front of his home. A Molotov cocktail was placed on the porch of what was believed to be the home of another UCLA primate researcher; instead, it was accidentally left on the porch of an elderly woman unrelated to the university. The Animal Liberation Front claimed responsibility for the attack.193 As a result of the campaign, the researcher sent an email to the Primate Freedom Project stating &quot;you win,&quot; and &quot;please don&lt;U+2019&gt;t bother my family anymore.&quot;194 In another incident at UCLA in June 2007, the Animal Liberation Brigade placed a bomb under the car of a UCLA children's ophthalmologist who experiments on cats and rhesus monkeys; the bomb had a faulty fuse and did not detonate.195 UCLA is now refusing Freedom of Information Act requests for animal medical records.
Alternatives to animal testing
Scientists and governments state that animal testing should cause as little suffering to animals as possible, and that animal tests should only be performed where necessary. The &quot;three Rs&quot;196 are guiding principles for the use of animals in research in most countries:
Reduction refers to methods that enable researchers to obtain comparable levels of information from fewer animals, or to obtain more information from the same number of animals.
Replacement refers to the preferred use of non-animal methods over animal methods whenever it is possible to achieve the same scientific aim.
Refinement refers to methods that alleviate or minimize potential pain, suffering or distress, and enhance animal welfare for the animals still used.197
Although such principles have been welcomed as a step forwards by some animal welfare groups,198 they have also been criticized as both outdated by current research,199 and of little practical effect in improving animal welfare.200
See also
Bateson's cube
Human experimentation
Rat Park
The People's Petition
Notes
Further reading and external links
Conn, P. Michael and Parker, James V (2008). The Animal Research War, Palgrave Macmillan, ISBN 978-0230600140
Stephens, Martin &amp; Rowan, Andrew. , Humane Society of the United States, retrieved October 29, 2005
1940 American/Soviet film of dog resurrection experiments
&quot;Select Committee on Animals In Scientific Procedures Report&quot;, Select Committee on Animals in Scientific Procedures, British House of Lords, July 16, 2002, retrieved October 27, 2005.
&quot;Statistics of Scientific Procedures on Living Animals&quot;, Great Britain, 2004.
&quot;Why use animals?&quot; and other FAQ, North Carolina Association for Biomedical Research, retrieved October 23, 2005
&quot;Basic statement&quot;, A&lt;U+00EB&gt;rzte gegen Tierversuche (Doctors against Animal Experiments], retrieved October 23, 2005.
&quot;Biomed for the layperson&quot;, Laboratory Primate Advocacy Group, retrieved February 24, 2006.
In Focus &quot;Animal Experiments in Research&quot; (German Reference Centre for Ethics in the Life Sciences)
Encyclopedia of Earth: Animal testing alternatives
da:Fors&lt;U+00F8&gt;gsdyr de:Tierversuch fr:Exp&lt;U+00E9&gt;rimentation animale it:Sperimentazione animale he:&lt;U+05E0&gt;&lt;U+05D9&gt;&lt;U+05E1&gt;&lt;U+05D5&gt;&lt;U+05D9&gt;&lt;U+05D9&gt;&lt;U+05DD&gt; &lt;U+05D1&gt;&lt;U+05D1&gt;&lt;U+05E2&gt;&lt;U+05DC&gt;&lt;U+05D9&gt; &lt;U+05D7&gt;&lt;U+05D9&gt;&lt;U+05D9&gt;&lt;U+05DD&gt; nl:Dierproef ja:&lt;U+52D5&gt;&lt;U+7269&gt;&lt;U+5B9F&gt;&lt;U+9A13&gt; pt:Teste com animais fi:El&lt;U+00E4&gt;inkoe sv:Djurf&lt;U+00F6&gt;rs&lt;U+00F6&gt;k
* Category:Animal rights Category:Biology Category:Medical research Category:Physiology Category:Research methods Category:Laboratory techniques
&quot;Vivisection FAQ, British Union for the Abolition of Vivisection; &quot;The Ethics of research involving animals&quot;, Nuffield Council on Bioethics, section 1.6.↩
&quot;Use of Laboratory Animals in Biomedical and Behavioral Research&quot;, Institute for Laboratory Animal Research, The National Academies Press, 1988. Also see Cooper, Sylvia. &quot;Pets crowd animal shelter&quot;, The Augusta Chronicle, August 1, 1999; and Gillham, Christina. &quot;Bought to be sold&quot;, Newsweek, February 17, 2006.↩
&quot;Introduction&quot;, Select Committee on Animals In Scientific Procedures Report, United Kingdom Parliament.↩
The use of non-human animals in research: a guide for scientists The Royal Society, 2004, page 1↩
&quot;Science, Medicine, and Animals&quot;, Institute for Laboratory Animal Research, Published by the National Research Council of the National Academies 2004; page 2↩
1985 Amendment to Animal Welfare Act Accessed 27 February 2008↩
Summary of House of Lords Select Committee on Animals In Scientific Procedures Accessed 27 February 2008↩
&quot;Vivisection&quot;, ''Encyclopaedia Britannica, 2007. Also see Croce, Pietro. Vivisection or Science? An Investigation into Testing Drugs and Safeguarding Health. Zed Books, 1999, and &quot;FAQs: Vivisection&quot;, British Union for the Abolition of Vivisection.↩
Carbone, Larry. What Animals Want: Expertise and Advocacy in Laboratory Animal Welfare. Oxford University Press, 2004, p. 22.↩
Paixao, RL; Schramm, FR. Ethics and animal experimentation: what is debated? Cad. Sa&lt;U+00FA&gt;de P&lt;U+00FA&gt;blica, Rio de Janeiro, 2007↩
Yarri, Donna. The Ethics of Animal Experimentation, Oxford University Press U.S., 2005↩
Cohen and Loew 1984.↩
&quot;History of nonhuman animal research&quot;, Laboratory Primate Advocacy Group.↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
Jaenisch R, Mintz B (1974) Simian virus 40 DNA sequences in DNA of healthy adult mice derived from preimplantation blastocysts injected with viral DNA Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. volume 71 issue 4 pages 1250&lt;U+2013&gt;4 PMID 4364530↩
Taste of Raspberries, Taste of Death. The 1937 Elixir Sulfanilamide Incident, FDA Consumer magazine June 1981.↩
Ryder, Richard D. Animal Revolution: Changing Attitudes Towards Speciesism. Berg Publishers, 2000, p. 54.↩
&quot;Animal Experimentation: A Student Guide to Balancing the Issues&quot;, Australian and New Zealand Council for the Care of Animals in Research and Teaching (ANZCCART), retrieved December 12, 2007, cites original reference in Maehle, A-H. and Tr6hler, U. Animal experimentation from antiquity to the end of the eighteenth century: attitudes and arguments. In N. A. Rupke (ed.) Vivisection in Historical Perspective. Croom Helm, London, 1987, p. 22.↩
Croce, Pietro. Vivisection or Science? An Investigation into Testing Drugs and Safeguarding Health. Zed Books, 1999, p. 11.↩
Rudacille, Deborah. The Scalpel and the Butterfly: The Conflict, Farrar Straus Giroux, 2000, p. 19.↩
&quot;In sickness and in health: vivisection's undoing&quot;, ''The Daily Telegraph, November 2003.↩
Bernard, Claude An Introduction to the Study of Experimental Medicine, 1865. First English translation by Henry Copley Greene, published by Macmillan &amp; Co., Ltd., 1927; reprinted in 1949, p125↩
LaFollette, H., Shanks, N., Animal Experimentation: the Legacy of Claude Bernard, International Studies in the Philosophy of Science (1994) pp. 195-210.↩
The Physiologist at the-aps.org A Physiologist&lt;U+2019&gt;s Views on the Animal Rights/Liberation Movement by Charles S. Nicoll The Physiologist 34(6): Dec 1991↩
Mason, Peter. The Brown Dog Affair. Two Sevens Publishing, 1997.↩
The Life and Letters of Charles Darwin, Volume II, fullbooks.com.↩
Bowlby, John. Charles Darwin: A New Life, W. W. Norton &amp; Company, 1991. p. 420.↩
Buettinger, Craig Antivivisection and the charge of zoophil-psychosis in the early twentieth century. The Historian 1 January 1993↩
Carbone, Larry. '&quot;What Animal Want: Expertise and Advocacy in Laboratory Animal Welfare Policy''. Oxford University Press, 2004, pp. 68-69.↩
Carbone 2004, p. 94.↩
Carbone 2004, pp. 70-71.↩
&quot;Vivisection FAQ, British Union for the Abolition of Vivisection.↩
The Ethics of research involving animals Nuffield Council on Bioethics, Accessed 27 February 2008↩
Carbone 2004, p. 26.↩
2005 Report on Enforcement of the Animal Welfare Act U.S. Department of Agriculture, Accessed 08 February 2008↩
The humane care and treatment of laboratory animals National Association of Biomedical Research, Accessed 08 February 2008↩
Frankie L. Trull and Barbara A. Rich (1999) &quot;More Regulation of Rodents&quot; Science, Volume 284. number 5419, page 1463. DOI 10.1126/science.284.5419.1463↩
Rowan, A., Loew, F., and Weer, J. (1995) &quot;The Animal Research Controversy. Protest, Process and Public Policy: An Analysis of Strategic Issues.&quot; Tufts University, North Grafton. cited in Carbone 2004, p. 26.↩
Alternatives to Animal Use in Research, Testing and Education, U.S. Congress Office of Technology Assessment, Washington, D.C.:Government Printing Office, 1986, p. 64. In 1966, the Laboratory Animal Breeders Association estimated in testimony before Congress that the number of mice, rats, guinea pigs, hamsters, and rabbits used in 1965 was around 60 million. (Hearings before the Subcommittee on Livestock and Feed Grains, Committee on Agriculture, U.S. House of Representatives, 1966, p. 63.) In 2004, the Department of Agriculture listed 64,932 dogs, 23,640 cats, 54,998 non-human primates, 244,104 guinea pigs, 175,721 hamsters, 261,573 rabbits, 105,678 farm animals, and 171,312 other mammals, a total of 1,101,958, a figure that includes all mammals except purpose-bred mice and rats. The use of dogs and cats in research in the U.S. decreased from 1973 to 2004 from 195,157 to 64,932, and from 66,165 to 23,640, respectively. (&quot;Foundation for Biomedical Research, Quick Facts)↩
&quot;Statistics of Scientific Procedures on Living Animals&quot;, Great Britain, 2004, p. 14.↩
Jha, Alok. &quot;RSPCA outrage as experiments on animals rise to 2.85m&quot;, The Guardian, December 9, 2005.↩
Antoshechkin I, Sternberg PW (2007) &quot;The versatile worm: genetic and genomic resources for Caenorhabditis elegans research&quot; Nat. Rev. Genet. volume 8 issue 7 pages 518&lt;U+2013&gt;32 PMID 17549065↩
Matthews KA, Kaufman TC, Gelbart WM (2005) &quot;Research resources for Drosophila: the expanding universe&quot; Nat. Rev. Genet. volume 6 issue 3 pages 179&lt;U+2013&gt;93 PMID 15738962↩
Schulenburg, H., Kurz, C.L., Ewbank, J.J. &quot;Evolution of the innate immune system: the worm perspective,&quot; Immunol. Rev., volume 198, pp. 36-58, 2004. PMID 15199953↩
Leclerc V, Reichhart JM. &quot;The immune response of Drosophila melanogaster,&quot; Immunol. Rev.. volume 198, pp. 59-71, 2004. PMID 15199954↩
Mylonakis E., Aballay A. &quot;Worms and flies as genetically tractable animal models to study host-pathogen interactions&quot;, Infect. Immun., volume 73, issue 7, pp. 3833-41, 2005. PMID 15972468↩
Rosenthal N, Brown S. &quot;The mouse ascending: perspectives for human-disease models,&quot; Nat. Cell Biol, Volume 9, issue 9, pp. 993-9, 2007. PMID 17762889↩
&quot;Statistics of Scientific Procedures on Living Animals, Great Britain, 2004, British government.↩
Cat madness: human research using cats AAVS newsletter Winter 2003↩
Dog profile, The Humane Society of the United States.↩
Gillham, Christina. &quot;Bought to be sold&quot;, Newsweek, February 17, 2006.↩
International Perspectives: The Future of Nonhuman Primate Resources, Proceedings of the Workshop Held April 17-19, pages 36-45, 46-48, 63-69, 197-200.↩
Primatology FAQ↩
Science article on chimps in the USA↩
Kathleen M. Conlee, Erika H. Hoffeld and Martin L. Stephens Demographic Analysis of Primate Research in the United States ATLA 32, Supplement 1, 315&lt;U+2013&gt;322, 2004↩
Invertebrate Animal Resources National Center for Research Resources, Accessed 15th December 2007↩
&quot;Who's Who of Federal Oversight of Animal Issues&quot;, Aesop Project.↩
Collins FS, Rossant J, Wurst W. (2007) &quot;A mouse for all reasons&quot;, Cell, volume 128, issue 1, pages 9&lt;U+2013&gt;13. PMID 17218247↩
Francione, Gary. Animals, Property, and the Law. Temple University Press, 1995, p. 192; Magnuson, Warren G., Chairman. &quot;Opening remarks in hearings prior to enactment of Pub. L. 89-544, the Laboratory Animal Welfare Act,&quot; U.S. Senate Committee on Commerce, March 25, 1966.↩
Notorious Animal Dealer Loses License and Pays Record Fine, The Humane Society of the United States.↩
Animal Testing: Where Do the Animals Come From? American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals. According to the ASPCA, the following states prohibit shelters from providing animals for research: Connecticut, Delaware, Hawaii, Maine, Maryland, Massachusetts, New Hampshire, New Jersey, New York, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, South Carolina, Vermont, and West Virginia.↩
Council Directive 86/609/EEC of 24 November 1986↩
Brooman, Simon and Legge, Debbie. Law Relating to Animals, Taylor &amp; Francis Group, 1999.↩
&quot;Statistics of Scientific Procedures on Living Animals&quot;, Statistics of Scientific Procedures on Living Animals, Home Office, 2004, p. 87.↩
U.S. Primate Imports Spike International Primate Protection League April 2007↩
Duncan IJ, Petherick JC. (1991) &quot;The implications of cognitive processes for animal welfare&quot;, J. Anim. Sci., volume 69, issue 12, pages 5017&lt;U+2013&gt;22. PMID 1808195; Curtis SE, Stricklin WR. (1991) &quot;The importance of animal cognition in agricultural animal production systems: an overview&quot;, J. Anim. Sci.. volume 69, issue 12, pages 5001&lt;U+2013&gt;7. PMID 1808193↩
Ryder, Richard D. &quot;Speciesism in the laboratory,&quot; in Singer, Peter. In Defense of Animals: The Second Wave. Blackwell, 2006. p. 99.↩
Townsend, Mark. &quot;Exposed: secrets of the animal organ lab&quot;, The Observer, April 20, 2003. The Home Office response to these allegations is Imutran Ltd: Response to the Home Affairs Committee - licensing and regulating the xenotransplantation research, 14 October, 2003↩
Carbone, Larry. '&quot;What Animal Want: Expertise and Advocacy in Laboratory Animal Welfare Policy''. Oxford University Press, 2004, p. 149.↩
Rollin drafted the 1985 Health Research Extension Act and an animal welfare amendment to the 1985 Food Security Act: see Rollin, Bernard. &quot;Animal research: a moral science. Talking Point on the use of animals in scientific research&quot;, EMBO reports 8, 6, 2007, pp. 521&lt;U+2013&gt;525↩
Rollin, Bernard. The Unheeded Cry: Animal Consciousness, Animal Pain, and Science. New York: Oxford University Press, 1989, pp. xii, 117-118, cited in Carbone 2004, p. 150.↩
Griffin DR, Speck GB (2004) &quot;New evidence of animal consciousness&quot; Anim. Cogn. volume 7 issue 1 pages=5&lt;U+2013&gt;18 PMID 14658059↩
Allen C (1998) Assessing animal cognition: ethological and philosophical perspectives J. Anim. Sci. volume 76 issue 1 pages 42-7 PMID 9464883↩
Lockwood JA (1987) The Moral Standing of Insects and the Ethics of Extinction The Florida Entomologist, Volume 70, Number 1, pages 70-89↩
DeGrazia D, Rowan A (1991) Pain, suffering, and anxiety in animals and humans Theoretical Medicine and Bioethics Volume 12, Number 3, pages 193-211↩
Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals, ILAR, National Research Council, 1996 copyright, pg 64↩
Animal Procedures Committee: review of cost-benefit assessment in the use of animals in research The Animal Procedures Committee, June 2003 p46-7↩
Carbone, Larry. &quot;Euthanasia,&quot; in Bekoff, M. and Meaney, C. Encyclopedia of Animal Rights and Welfare. Greenwood Publishing Group, pp. 164-166, cited in Carbone 2004, pp. 189-190.↩
&quot;Euthanasia Guidelines&quot;, Research animal resources, University of Minnesota.↩
Close, Bryonyl et al. &quot;Recommendations for euthanasia of experimental animals: Part 1&quot;, Laboratory Animals, Volume 30, Number 4, October 1996, p. 295.↩
Guide for the care and use of laboratory animals, 1996 Edition, Euthanasia section on pg 65↩
AVMA Guidelines on Euthanasia, June 2007 edition Report of the AVMA Panel on Euthanasia, Accessed 08 February 2008↩
Select Committee on Animals in Scientific Procedures Report, House of Lords, Chapter 3: The purpose and nature of animal experiments.↩
&quot;An A to Z of laboratory animals&quot; Research Defense Society. Accessed 22nd August 2007; Job, C.K. &quot;Nine-banded armadillo and leprosy research,&quot; Indian journal of pathology &amp; microbiology, Volume 46, issue 4, 2003, pp. 541-50. PMID 15025339↩
Venken KJ, Bellen HJ (2005) &quot;Emerging technologies for gene manipulation in Drosophila melanogaster&quot; Nat. Rev. Genet. volume 6 issue 3 pages 167&lt;U+2013&gt;78 PMID 15738961↩
Sung YH, Song J, Lee HW (2004) &quot;Functional genomics approach using mice&quot; J. Biochem. Mol. Biol. volume 37 issue 1 pages=122&lt;U+2013&gt;32 PMID 14761310↩
Janies D., DeSalle R. &quot;Development, evolution, and corroboration,&quot; Anat. Rec., Volume 257, issue 1, pp. 6-14, 1999. PMID 10333399↩
Akam, M. &quot;Hox genes and the evolution of diverse body plans,&quot; Philos. Trans. R. Soc. Lond. B, Biol. Sci., Volume 349, issue 1329, 1995, pp. 313&lt;U+2013&gt;9. PMID 8577843↩
Prasad B., Reed R., &quot;Chemosensation: molecular mechanisms in worms and mammals&quot;, Trends in Genetics Volume 15, pp. 150-153. 1999↩
Schafer WR (2006) &quot;Neurophysiological methods in C. elegans: an introduction&quot; WormBook pages 1&lt;U+2013&gt;4 PMID 18050439↩
Yamamuro, Y. Social behavior in laboratory rats: Applications for psycho-neuroethology studies Animal Science Journal, 77, pp. 386&lt;U+2013&gt;394, 2006↩
Marler P., Slabbekoorn H, Nature's Music: The Science of Birdsong, Academic Press, 2004. ISBN 0124730701↩
For example &quot;in addition to providing the chimpanzees with enrichment, the termite mound is also the focal point of a tool-use study being conducted&quot;, from the web page of the Lincoln Park Zoo accessed 25 April 2007.↩
Festing, M., &quot;Inbred Strains of Mice and their Characteristics&quot;, ''The Jackson Laboratory '', Retrieved 30 January, 2008↩
Casci, T., &quot;Evolution: Sticklebacks finally get a map&quot;, Nature Reviews Genetics 3, 84, 2002↩
Ramaswamy S, McBride JL, Kordower JH (2007) &quot;Animal models of Huntington's disease&quot; ILAR J volume 48 issue 4 pages 356&lt;U+2013&gt;73 PMID 17712222↩
Rees DA, Alcolado JC (2005) &quot;Animal models of diabetes mellitus&quot; Diabet. Med. volume 22 issue 4 pages 359&lt;U+2013&gt;70 PMID 15787657↩
Iwakuma T, Lozano G (2007) &quot;Crippling p53 activities via knock-in mutations in mouse models&quot; Oncogene volume 26 issue 15 pages 2177&lt;U+2013&gt;84 PMID 17401426↩
Frese KK, Tuveson DA (2007) &quot;Maximizing mouse cancer models&quot; Nat. Rev. Cancer volume 7 issue 9 pages 645&lt;U+2013&gt;58 PMID 17687385↩
Dunham SP. &quot;Lessons from the cat: development of vaccines against lentiviruses,&quot; Vet. Immunol. Immunopathol, volume 112, issues 1-2, 2006, pp. 67&lt;U+2013&gt;77. PMID 16678276; Vail DM, MacEwen EG. &quot;Spontaneously occurring tumors of companion animals as models for human cancer,&quot; Cancer Invest, volume 18, issue 8, 2000, pp. 781&lt;U+2013&gt;92. PMID 11107448↩
Job, C.K. &quot;Nine-banded armadillo and leprosy research,&quot; Indian journal of pathology &amp; microbiology, Volume 46, issue 4, pp. 541-50, 2003. PMID 15025339; 1↩
Pound et al 2004 Where is the evidence that animal research benefits humans? BMJ 28;328(7438):514-7 PMID 14988196↩
Langley, Gill next of kin...A report on the use of primates in experiments, BUAV, 2006↩
The History of Deep Brain Stimulation The Parkinson's Appeal, Accessed 27 February 2008↩
Emborg ME (2007) &quot;Nonhuman primate models of Parkinson's disease&quot; ILAR J volume 48 issue 4 pages 339&lt;U+2013&gt;55 PMID 17712221↩
Tolwani RJ, Jakowec MW, Petzinger GM, Green S, Waggie K (1999) &quot;Experimental models of Parkinson's disease: insights from many models&quot; Lab. Anim. Sci. volume 49 issue 4 pages 363&lt;U+2013&gt;71 PMID 10480640↩
Platt JL, Lin SS (1998) &quot;The future promises of xenotransplantation&quot; Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci., volume 862, pages 5&lt;U+2013&gt;18, PMID 9928201↩
Schuurman HJ, Pierson RN (2008) &quot;Progress towards clinical xenotransplantation&quot; Front. Biosci., volume 13, pages 204&lt;U+2013&gt;20, PMID 17981539↩
Vald&lt;U+00E9&gt;s-Gonz&lt;U+00E1&gt;lez RA, Dorantes LM, Garibay GN, et al (2005) &quot;Xenotransplantation of porcine neonatal islets of Langerhans and Sertoli cells: a 4-year study&quot; Eur. J. Endocrinol., volume 153, issue 3, pages 419&lt;U+2013&gt;27, PMID 16131605↩
Vald&lt;U+00E9&gt;s-Gonz&lt;U+00E1&gt;lez RA, White DJ, Dorantes LM, et al (2007) &quot;Three-yr follow-up of a type 1 diabetes mellitus patient with an islet xenotransplant&quot; Clin Transplant, volume 21, issue 3, pages 352&lt;U+2013&gt;7, PMID 17488384↩
Townsend, Mark. &quot;Exposed: secrets of the animal organ lab&quot;, The Observer, April 20, 2003.↩
Townsend, Mark. &quot;Exposed: secrets of the animal organ lab&quot;, The Observer, April 20, 2003.↩
&quot;Diaries of despair&quot;, xenodiaries.org, Uncaged Campaigns, retrieved June 18, 2006.↩
Household Product Tests BUAV↩
Fifth Report on the Statistics on the Number of Animals used for Experimental and other Scientific Purposes in the Member States of the European Union Commission of the European Communities, published November 2007↩
Abbott, Alison. &quot;Animal testing: More than a cosmetic change&quot; Nature 438, 144-146, November 10, 2005.↩
↩
Walum E Acute oral toxicity Environ. Health Perspect. volume 106 Suppl 2 pages 498&lt;U+2013&gt;499 1998 pmid 9599698↩
Inter-Governmental Organization Eliminates the LD50 Test, The Humane Society of the United States, accessed 17 January 2008↩
OECD guideline 405 Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, Accessed 19 January 2008↩
Species Used in Research: Rabbit Humane Society of the United States, Accessed 19 January 2008↩
Wilhelmus, K.R. &quot;The Draize eye test,&quot; Surv Ophthalmol volume 45, issue 6, 2001, pages 493&lt;U+2013&gt;515, PMID 11425356↩
Secchi A., Deligianni V. &quot;Ocular toxicology: the Draize eye test,&quot; Curr Opin Allergy Clin Immunol volume 6, issue 5, 2006, pp. 367&lt;U+2013&gt;72. PMID 16954791↩
Toxicity Testing for Assessment of Environmental Agents&quot; National Academies Press, (2006), p21, Accessed 15th December↩
↩
↩
An overview of Animal Testing Issues, Humane Society of the United States. Accessed 27 February 2008↩
Osborn, Andrew &amp; Gentleman, Amelia.&quot;Secret French move to block animal-testing ban&quot;, The Guardian, August 19, 2003. Accessed 27 February 2008↩
EU Directive 2001/83/EC, p.44. Accessed 27 February 2008↩
EU Directive 2001/83/EC, p. 45. Accessed 27 February 2008↩
Dalal, Rooshin et al. Replacement Alternatives in Education: Animal-Free Teaching abstract from Fifth World Congress on Alternatives and Animal Use in the Life Sciences, Berlin, August 2005.↩
Seeking an End to Animal Experimentation, Deutsche Welle, August 23, 2005, retrieved on December 16, 2007.↩
Bernard E. Rollin (2006) &quot;The Regulation of Animal Research and the Emergence of Animal Ethics: A Conceptual History&quot; Theoretical Medicine and Bioethics Volume 27 Number 4 pages 285-304 DOI 10.1007/s11017-006-9007-8↩
Peter Singer (Ed) &quot;A Companion to Ethics&quot;, Blackwell Companions to Philosophy, 1991, Chapter 30 &quot;Animals&quot; by Lori Gruen p346↩
Helga Kuhse and Peter Singer &quot;A Companion to Bioethics&quot;, Blackwell Publishing, 1998, Chapter 39 by Bernard E. Rollin &quot;The moral status of animals and their use as experimental subjects.&quot; p414↩
Singer (1991) op. cit. p348↩
Gagneux P, Moore JJ, Varki A (2005) &quot;The ethics of research on great apes&quot; Nature volume 437 issue 7055 pages 27&lt;U+2013&gt;9 PMID 16136111↩
Vermij P (2003) &quot;Europe's last research chimps to retire&quot; Nat. Med. volume 9 issue 8 pages 981 year 2003 PMID 12894144↩
&quot;It's a Dog's Life&quot; (1997), Countryside Undercover, Channel Four Television, UK.↩
Video link↩
Wilmut I, Schnieke AE, McWhir J, Kind AJ, Campbell KH (1997) &quot;Viable offspring derived from fetal and adult mammalian cells&quot; Nature volume 385 issue 6619 pages 810&lt;U+2013&gt;3 PMID 9039911↩
The Perils of Cloning Alice Park Time magazine, published 05 July 2006, Accessed 24 February 2008↩
Dolly's final illness Roslin Institute, Accessed 21 February 2008↩
Exploring the Moral and Ethical Aspects of Genetically Engineered and Cloned Animals The Pew Charitable Trusts, published October 2005, Accessed 24 February 2008↩
Should we clone humans? Church of Scotland Society, Religion and Technology Project. published 19 November 1998, Accessed 24 February 2007↩
Undercover footage of staff in Covance screaming at and mocking monkeys↩
Covance Prevails in PETA lawsuit&quot;, Covance, October 17, 2005.↩
, , review by the British government's chief inspector of animals, October 2002, p.56.↩
Newkirk, Ingrid. Free the Animals, Lantern Books, 2000, pp. 271-294.↩
&quot;Abstract: Trisenor rearing with infant macaques&quot;, Crisp.↩
&quot;Group Says It 'Rescued' 260 Animals From Lab&quot;, Associated Press, April 21, 1985.↩
Newkirk 2000↩
Group raids labs, takes animals, Associated Press, in the Philadelphia Inquirer, April 22, 1985 A10↩
&quot;E. Sander Connolly&quot;, PETA.↩
Columbia in animal cruelty dispute&quot;, CNN, October 12, 2003.↩
Throwing in the Towel David Epstein ''Inside Higher Education, Aug. 22, 2006↩
Predators Unleashed Investor's Business Daily 24 August 2006↩
McDonald, Patrick Range. UCLA Monkey Madness LA Weekly, August 8, 2007.↩
↩
The 3Rs The National Centre for the Replacement, Refinement and Reduction of Animals in Research. Accessed 12 December 2007↩
↩
↩
↩
