Charles Morgan Herbert Atherton (November 19, 1874 &lt;U+2013&gt; December 19, 1934) was a Major League Baseball third baseman. Nicknamed &quot;Prexy&quot;, he batted and threw right-handed, was  tall and weighed 160 pounds. Atherton was also an early professional football player and coach for the Greensburg Athletic Association. He also played professional football in 1896 for the Pittsburgh Athletic Club. Charles attended Penn State University and was the son of the university's president, George W. Atherton. He was Penn State's first sports star as a member of the school's baseball and football teams. He is also credited with inventing the place kick.1
Atherton made his Major League debut on May 30, 1899 at the age of 24. He hit .248 in 242 at bats in 1899, which would end up being his only Major League season. He also hit 5 doubles, 6 triples and had 23 RBI. Defensively, Atherton committed 26 errors, which was fourth worst on the now defunct Washington Senators team of the National League. He played his final game on August 22, 1899.2
Outside of sports, Charlie was an accomplished musician and writer who witnessed the Russian Revolution, World War I, and the Nazis rise to power first hand. He documented each event in highly descriptive letters to his sister, Harriet.3
References
External links
Category:1874 births Category:1934 deaths Category:19th-century baseball players Category:Players of American football from New Jersey Category:Baseball players from New Jersey Category:People from New Brunswick, New Jersey Category:Major League Baseball third basemen Category:Washington Senators (1891&lt;U+2013&gt;1899) players Category:Pittsburgh Athletic Club (football) players Category:Penn State Nittany Lions football players Category:Penn State Nittany Lions baseball players Category:Pennsylvania State University alumni Category:Greensburg Athletic Association coaches Category:Greensburg Athletic Association players Category:19th-century players of American football Category:Minor league baseball managers Category:Altoona Mad Turtles players Category:Scranton Indians players Category:Shenandoah Huns players Category:Houston Buffaloes players Category:Wilkes-Barre Coal Barons players Category:Milwaukee Brewers (minor league) players Category:Milwaukee Creams players Category:Columbus Senators players Category:Buffalo Bisons (minor league) players Category:Los Angeles Angels (minor league) players Category:Los Angeles (minor league baseball) players Category:Montreal Royals players Category:Indianapolis Indians players Category:Johnstown Johnnies players Category:Portland Beavers players
↩
↩
