Tunbridge Wells railway station serves Tunbridge Wells in Kent, in England. The station and all trains serving it are currently operated by Southeastern. It is located directly on the double-tracked electrified Hastings Line.
The station is located in an open cut, and the railway line enters tunnels in both directions. The ticket office and platform 1 (generally used by northbound trains) can be accessed directly from street level on the west side of the station or by a footbridge from the east side; platform 2 (generally used by southbound trains) is accessible only by stairs - there is a gate at the south end of platform 2 giving step-free access which is usually kept locked but which station staff will open on request for those who need it. Both platforms are signalled for reversible working - trains can arrive/depart at either platform in either direction.
Just beyond the tunnel at the south end of the station was Grove Junction, where trains took the single line branch to Tunbridge Wells West. The branch closed on 6 July 1985. Before the closure of the branch, the station was called Tunbridge Wells Central.
Services
The typical off-peak service from the station is:
2 tph (trains per hour) to London Charing Cross via Tonbridge and Sevenoaks,
2 tph to Hastings,
1 tph to London Bridge via Tonbridge, Redhill and East Croydon, and
1 tph to Horsham via Redhill.
Monday - Friday peak hours there are additional trains which start from or terminate at Tunbridge Wells to/from Charing Cross and also some through trains to/from London Cannon Street. From the December 2009 timetable there will be an extra 2 trains per hour from Charing Cross to Tunbridge Wells. This will be possible because of extra paths being made available because a reduction of Charing Cross to Dover/Ramsgate services due to the CTRL high speed services from St Pancras.
See also
There is a DVD of the driver's view of the Hastings line into Charing Cross.
External links
Category:Tunbridge Wells Category:Railway stations in Kent Category:Railway stations opened in 1846
