Jennifer Haigh is an American novelist and short story writer.
She was born in 1968 in Barnesboro, a Western Pennsylvania coal town 85 miles northeast of Pittsburgh in Cambria County. She attended Dickinson College in Carlisle, Pennsylvania and earned a Master of Fine Arts degree from the Iowa Writers' Workshop in 2002. Her fiction has been published in Granta, Ploughshares, The Virginia Quarterly Review, Good Housekeeping, and many other publications.
Her debut novel Mrs. Kimble&lt;U+2014&gt;telling the story of a mysterious con man named Ken Kimble through the eyes of his three wives &lt;U+2013&gt; (2003) won the PEN/Hemingway Award for outstanding debut fiction.
Her next novel, Baker Towers (2005), depicts the rise and fall of a western Pennsylvania coal town in the years following World War II. It was a New York Times bestseller and won the 2006 PEN/L.L. Winship award for best book by a New England writer.
Her third novel, The Condition, was published by HarperCollins in July 2008. It traces the dissolution of a proper New England family when their only daughter is diagnosed with Turner's Syndrome, a chromosomal abnormality that keeps her from going through puberty.
Her most recent novel, Faith (2011), tells the story of a suburban Boston priest accused of molesting a boy in his parish.
Her short story, &quot;Paramour&quot;, published in the Winter 2011&lt;U+2013&gt;12 issue of Ploughshares, was selected for inclusion in the Best American Short Stories anthology in 2012.1
Haigh lives in the Boston area.
Awards and honors
2005 L.L. Winship/PEN New England Award, Baker Towers
Bibliography
Novels
Mrs Kimble (2003)
Baker Towers (2005)
The condition (2008)
Faith (2011)
Short fiction
References
External links
Jennifer Haigh Official site
Jennifer Haigh reads for &quot;The Drum&quot; Literary Magazine for your ears
PEN.New England Official site
&quot;Women Trying to Find Their Way in a Dying Coal Town&quot; from The New York Times.
&quot;Cutaway&quot; A short story from Natural Bridge: A Journal of Contemporary Literature (Number 8, Fall 2002).
&quot;A Child With a Problem, a Family With an Excuse&quot; from The New York Times.
&quot;Broken Star&quot; A short story from Granta (Number 103, Autumn 2008).
A trailer for Faith
&quot;Books: Jennifer Haigh's 'Faith,' review by Ron Charles&quot; from The Washington Post
Category:Living people Category:21st-century American novelists Category:American women novelists Category:American short story writers Category:Dickinson College alumni Category:Writers from Massachusetts Category:Writers from Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania Category:People from Boston, Massachusetts Category:Iowa Writers' Workshop alumni Category:1968 births
↩
