The Evansville Museum of Arts, History &amp; Science is a general-interest museum located on the Ohio riverfront in downtown Evansville, Indiana, United States. Founded in 1904, it is one of Southern Indiana's most established and significant cultural institutions, with comprehensive collections in art, history, anthropology and science. The museum is accredited by the American Alliance of Museums.1
Exhibits
The Transportation Center
A Science Center offers exhibitions and programs to inspire and instruct students of all ages. The Koch Planetarium, the oldest planetarium in the state, provides explorations of the solar system.2 The Anthropology Gallery offers a look at cultures from 13,000 BC to the present. Artworks from the 16th century to the present are in the museum&lt;U+2019&gt;s permanent galleries. Visitors can also stroll down the street of a 19th Century American rivertown to see ornately decorated homes and shops. The Evansville Museum Transportation Center traces the history of transportation and features the Sprinklesburg, Goosetown, and Independence Steam Locomotive.The transportation center also includes a L&amp;N Tennessee Club Car and a caboose. The locomotive is a 1908 Milwaukee Road 0-6-0 switcher steam engine, believed to be the last of its kind. More information can be found at http://www.emuseum.org/transportation-center.
The museum has produced notable solo exhibitions of artists such as John Stuart Ingle, Don Gummer, and Theodore Clement Steele, sometimes in collaboration with other institutions, including the Wadsworth Atheneum, the Butler Institute of American Art, and the Indiana State Museum.
Expansion
In October 2012 the museum scaled back its plans in order to complete the last phase of a three year expansion announced in 2008.3 The modified plan calls for a glass walled, rectangular addition with a domed immersive planetarium and theater. The domed theater will lie entirely inside the building box, visible from the exterior. A pedestrian-friendly plaza and new museum entrance will connect the addition to parking and the Evansville Museum Transportation Center. The expansion, which began with repairs, renovations and additions to its existing building will be completed at a cost of $14.1 million.4
See also
Frederick Carder
Jane Frank
William Gropper
Jerry Wilkerson
References
Bibliography
John Camp; John Stuart Ingle; Evansville Museum of Arts and Science; Wadsworth Atheneum. The eye and the heart : watercolors of John Stuart Ingle (New York : Rizzoli ; Evansville, Ind. : Evansville Museum of Arts &amp; Science, 1988) (Worldcat link: 1) ISBN 0-8478-0888-2; ISBN 978-0-8478-0888-5
Don Gummer; Peter Plagens; Evansville Museum of Arts, History and Science.; Butler Institute of American Art.; Indiana State Museum. The lyrical constructivist : Don Gummer sculpture (Chesterfield, Mass. : Chameleon Books ; Evansville, Ind. : Evansville Museum of Arts, History &amp; Science, 2001) (Worldcat link: 2) ISBN 0-915829-70-3; ISBN 978-0-915829-70-5; ISBN 978-0-915829-70-5
William H Gerdts; T. C. Steele; Evansville Museum of Arts and Science; Valparaiso University Museum of Art. Theodore Clement Steele, an American master of light (New York, N.Y. : Chameleon Books, 1995) (Worldcat link:3) OCLC 33132008
NB: Some Worldcat listings and other sources refer to this museum as the &quot;Evansville Museum of Arts and Science&quot;. It is also commonly called the &quot;Evansville Museum&quot;.
External links
Website of the Evansville Museum
Category:Art museums in Indiana Category:History museums in Indiana Category:Science museums in Indiana Category:Institutions accredited by the American Alliance of Museums Category:Museums established in 1904 Category:Museums in Evansville, Indiana Category:1904 establishments in the United States
↩
↩
↩
↩
