RoyEl Wilfred Wooten (born October 13, 1957 in Hampton, Virginia) better known by his stage name Future Man (also spelled as Futureman), is an inventor, musician, and composer. He is known as Futch to his fans.1 He is a percussionist and member of the jazz quartet B&lt;U+00E9&gt;la Fleck and the Flecktones. The other members are banjoist B&lt;U+00E9&gt;la Fleck, saxophonist Jeff Coffin, and RoyEl's brother, electric bass virtuoso Victor Wooten.
Biography
Roy Wooten was raised in a military family and therefore traveled frequently. He is the second of five sons born to Dorothy and Elijah &quot;Pete&quot; Wooten. He graduated from Denbigh High School in Newport News, Virginia in 1975. He briefly attended music classes at Norfolk State University upon graduating from high school, and then embarked on his professional music career. He and his brothers moved to Nashville, Tennessee in the mid-1980s.
All of his brothers are musicians. The oldest, Regi, is a guitarist and much sought-after teacher in Nashville. Roy Wooten, Regi, and his three younger brothers, Rudy (saxophone), Joseph (keyboards), and Victor (bass guitar), performed as The Wooten Brothers in numerous musical venues in the Hampton Roads area of southeast Virginia during the 1970s.
Wooten is a two-time Grammy Award-winning performer with B&lt;U+00E9&gt;la Fleck and the Flecktones. For the Flecktones, he plays the Drumitar, a novel electronic instrument of his own invention.
More recently, Wooten has developed a new electronic instrument called the RoyEl,2 which resembles a piano but plays notes not found in the traditional western music scales. This instrument is based on the periodic table of elements3 and the golden ratio.
Solo work
 Like the other members of the Flecktones, Future Man has worked on various solo projects during his time off from the band. On his own Wooten often dresses up as a pirate and uses the pseudonym &quot;RoyEl&quot;, the name he gave to the keyboard instrument he invented. Future Man's solo albums are experimental and incorporate diverse musical genres and concepts. On Evolution de la Musique, for example, he infuses classical music with jazz elements, especially improvisation, and spoken word. Future Man's solo works are:
The Seamless Script
Pi Lullaby
Evolution de la Musique
The Black Mozart Ensemble
Tax evasion
In November 2001, Wooten was indicted on four counts of tax evasion, for the years 1995 to 1998. His defense in 2004 involved many implausible assertions. He claimed, for example, that the Internal Revenue Service is a debt collector based in Puerto Rico. He also used esoteric and arcane tax protester literature.
The court ordered a competency evaluation and postponed the trial. On May 4, 2005, Future Man pled guilty to one count of tax evasion; however, his reason for not paying taxes was &quot;I don't need to pay taxes, I'm from the future.&quot; He was sentenced on August 8, 2005 to two years probation and was ordered to pay $131,000 in back taxes.4
References
External links
Official site
B&lt;U+00E9&gt;la Fleck and the Flecktones official site
Category:1957 births Category:Living people Category:American jazz percussionists Category:Jazz drummers Category:African American musicians Category:Grammy Award winners Category:Norfolk State University alumni
↩
↩
↩
