Winifred Milius Lubell (b. January 14, 1914) is an American illustrator and writer. Lubell's most notable work includes the illustrations for Dorothy Sterling's Cape Cod natural history book The Outer Lands, and the women's studies exploration of feminism, sexuality and mythology: The Metamorphosis of Baubo, Myths of Woman's Sexual Energy.1
Personal life and education
Winifred Milius Lubell was born in New York, New York to a wealthy German Jewish family.2 She studied art under George Grosz at the Art Students League of New York from 1933 til 1935. Attending school during the Great Depression, Grosz would take Lubell and her fellow students to the Hooverville shantytown3 to document the plight of the homeless. In 1936 she began attending the Duncan Phillips Museum School in Washington, D.C.. She met and married ethnographer Cecil Lubell in 1939. The couple would share interests in mythology, psychology, linguistics, and specifically the history and visual styles of written language. Together, the couple would have two sons: David and Stephen.4 A communist, Lubell was active in the Artists' Union, the American Artists' Congress and the Communist Party of America.5
In 2003 Lubell donated her papers to the Archives of American Art. Today, Lubell lives in Wellfleet, Massachusetts.6
Creative career
After World War II Lubell began working as an illustrator. She co-created, with her husband, a series of children's books about animals, natural history, plants and ecosystems.7
Writing
In 1994 Lubell published The Metamorphosis of Baubo, Myths of Woman's Sexual Energy.8
Further reading
Lubell, Winifred Milius. The Metamorphosis of Baubo: Myths of Woman's Sexual Energy. Nashville: Vanderbilt University Press (1994). ISBN 0826512526
Sterling, Dorothy. The Outer Lands. New York: WW Norton &amp; Co (1978). ISBN 0393064387
References
Category:1914 births Category:21st-century women writers Category:American feminist writers Category:American illustrators Category:American people of German-Jewish descent Category:American social sciences writers Category:American women writers Category:Archives of American Art related Category:Art Students League of New York Category:Children's book illustrators Category:Living people Category:Members of the Communist Party USA Category:People from Manhattan Category:People from Wellfleet, Massachusetts
↩
