General Sir Walter Norris Congreve VC KCB MVO DL (20 November 1862 &lt;U+2013&gt; 28 February 1927) was an English army officer. He was 37 years old, and a captain in The Rifle Brigade (Prince Consort's Own), British Army during the Second Boer War when he won the VC.
Early career
Walter Norris Congreve was educated at Harrow School and Pembroke College, Oxford.1
Action at Colenso
On 15 December 1899 at the Battle of Colenso, South Africa, Captain Congreve with several others, tried to save the guns of the 14th and 66th Batteries, Royal Field Artillery, when the detachments serving the guns had all become casualties or been driven from their guns. Some of the horses and drivers were sheltering in a donga (gully) about 500 yards behind the guns and the intervening space was swept with shell and rifle fire. Captain Congreve, with two other officers (The Hon. Frederick Hugh Sherston Roberts and Harry Norton Schofield), and Corporal George Edward Nurse retrieved two of the guns. All four received the VC for this action. (F.S.H. Roberts was the son in one of the two other father and son pairs of VC winners.) Then, although wounded himself, seeing one of the officers fall, Congreve went out with Major William Babtie, RAMC, who also received the VC for this action, and brought in the wounded man. His citation read: 
The Somme: Action at Delville Wood
As commander of XIII Corps, Lt-Gen Congreve lead the battles for Longueval and Delville Wood between 14 July and 3 September 1916. The rapid advance of his Corps in the southern sector of the Somme offensive had brought about a situation where the allied front was set at a right angle – the left sector facing north and the right, facing east from Delville Wood. This meant that an advance on a wide front would result in the attacking forces diverging from one–another as they advanced.2 In order to &quot;straighten the line,&quot; General Sir Douglas Haig had decided to exploit the advances which had been made by Congreve in the south by taking and holding the town of Longueval and Delville Wood. Being on fairly high ground and providing good spotting opportunities for artillery fire, an occupied Longueval would protect the right flank and allow the Allies to advance in the north and align their left with that of Congreve's XIII Corps on the right.3 XIII Corps succeeded in securing Delville Wood, but it was one of the bloodiest confrontations of the Somme, with both sides incurring large casualties. During World War I, Congreve lost a hand in action.
Later life
Later, he rose to the rank of general and was knighted. He was General Officer Commanding the Egyptian Expeditionary Force between 1919 and 1922 and then Commander-in-Chief Southern Command between 1923 and 1924.4
From 1924 to 1927, Sir Walter served as the governor of Malta,5 where he died. At his request, he was buried at sea in the channel between the coast and Filfla Island; there is a small monument to him on the coast between Hamrija Tower and the pre-historic site of Mnajdra; the channel between Malta and Filfla is now unofficially known as Congreve Channel.
Sir Walter was also the father of Major William La Touche Congreve, VC - they are one of only three father and son pairs to win a VC.
Victoria Cross
Congreve's Victoria Cross is on display at the Royal Green Jackets Museum (Winchester, England).
Citations
References
References
David Harvey, Monuments to Courage, 1999
The Register of the Victoria Cross (This England, 1997)
Ian Uys, Victoria Crosses of the Anglo-Boer War, 2000
External links
Find-A-Grave profile for Walter Norris Congreve
de:Walter Norris Congreve
Category:British recipients of the Victoria Cross Category:Second Boer War recipients of the Victoria Cross Category:British Army World War I generals Category:Deputy Lieutenants of Staffordshire Category:Knights Commander of the Order of the Bath Category:Members of the Royal Victorian Order Category:1862 births Category:1927 deaths Category:Burials at sea Category:Governors and Governors-General of Malta Category:Old Harrovians Category:Rifle Brigade officers Category:British Army personnel of the Second Boer War Category:People from Chatham Category:Alumni of Pembroke College, Oxford Category:Chevaliers of the L&lt;U+00E9&gt;gion d'honneur Category:Knights of Grace of the Order of St John
Ian F. W. Beckett, &lt;U+2018&gt;Congreve, Sir Walter Norris (1862&lt;U+2013&gt;1927)&lt;U+2019&gt;, Oxford Dictionary of National Biography, Oxford University Press, Sept 2004; online edn, May 2006, accessed 31 May 2009↩
Prior &amp; Wilson p.141↩
Buchan p. 57↩
Liddell Hart Centre for Military Archives↩
