F. Warren Hellman (July 25, 1934 – December 18, 2011) was a private equity investor and co-founder of Hellman &amp; Friedman, a multi-billion dollar private equity firm.1 Hellman also co-founded Hellman, Ferri Investment Associates, today known as Matrix Partners, and started and funds the Hardly Strictly Bluegrass festival. Hellman passed away on December 18, 2011 of complications from his treatment for leukemia.2
Career
Hellman co-founded Hellman &amp; Friedman in 1984 with Tully Friedman and served as chairman of the firm as well as a member of the Firm's Investment and Compensation Committees.
Before H&amp;F, Hellman was a founding partner of Hellman, Ferri Investment Associates which would later be renamed Matrix Management Company. Today, Matrix is among the most prominent venture capital firms in the U.S.
Before that, Hellman worked in investment banking at Lehman Brothers, where he served as President as well as head of the Investment Banking Division and Chairman of Lehman Corporation.
Hellman received his undergraduate education at the University of California, Berkeley and he received an MBA from Harvard Business School.
Family history
Though his fortune was largely self-made, Hellman was the great-grandson of Isaias W. Hellman, a prominent early California banker, philanthropist, and a founding father of the University of Southern California.3
Other affiliations
Hellman was the primary sponsor and provided funding for the Hardly Strictly Bluegrass music festival in San Francisco's Golden Gate Park.456 In 2011, Speedway Meadow was renamed Hellman Hollow to honor his history of philanthropy and civic involvement in San Francisco. 7
Hellman was a donor and supporter of Jewish Vocational Services (JVS), a nonprofit organization that helps people transform their lives through work.
Hellman was a Director of D.N.&amp; E. Walter &amp; Co. and Sugar Bowl Corporation. He is also a member of the advisory board of the Walter A. Haas School of Business at the University of California at Berkeley. In 2005, Hellman was inducted into the American Academy of Arts and Sciences.
Hellman was the Chairman of the Board of The Bay Citizen, a non-profit news organization focusing on the San Francisco Bay Area. The Bay Citizen was founded with a $5 million contribution from the Hellman Family Foundation.8
He formerly served as a Director of numerous portfolio companies, including Eller Media Company, Nasdaq Stock Market and Young &amp; Rubicam.
Hellman served in the U.S. Army from 1955 through 1957.
Warren Hellman was honored by the San Francisco Board of Supervisors in December of 2011. Speedway Meadow, the location of his festival Hardly Strictly Bluegrass, has been officially renamed &quot;Hellman Hollow&quot;.
References
External links
F. Warren Hellman - Profile (Hellman &amp; Friedman company website)
Fixing the greed in private equity. Fortune, October 16, 2007
Category:Private equity and venture capital investors Category:American businesspeople Category:People from San Francisco, California Category:Harvard Business School alumni Category:University of California, Berkeley alumni Category:Lehman Brothers Category:1934 births Category:Living people Category:American bluegrass musicians
Hellman &amp; Friedman Raises $8.8 Billion Buyout Fund. Bloomberg, October 1, 2009↩
1. Bay Citizen, December 18, 2011↩
↩
Warren Hellman strums those recession blues. San Francisco Business Times, February 22, 2008↩
Warren Hellman: A tough banjo to pluck. San Francisco Examiner, September 20, 2008↩
Made Money, Makes Music. Forbes, October 5, 2006↩
http://blog.sfgate.com/cityinsider/2011/12/15/warren-hellman-honored-with-golden-gate-park-meadow-renaming/↩
http://www.baycitizen.org/about/history/↩
