The Australian Netherlands Committee on Old Dutch Shipwrecks (ANCODS)is an organization tasked with maintaining and allocating artefacts from 17th and 18th century Dutch shipwrecks off the coast of Western Australia. It was founded by the 1972 Agreement between Australia and the Netherlands Concerning Old Dutch Shipwrecks.1
History
The Ships
The development for ANCODS began with the discovery in the 1950s and 1960s of four Dutch East India Company ships off the coast of Western Australia.
Zuytdorp (1712)
In 1712, Zuytdorp struck the cliffs 60 km north of the Murchison River mouth. It was the only wreck of the four not to have survivors return to Batavia (modern day Jakarta). There is evidence of survivors, however, reaching the top of the cliffs but events on shore remain sketchy. Zuytdorp remained in the same place until the location of the wreck was publicised in the local press in 1930, rumors about some wreckage spreading prior to 1927. However, it was not until 1958 that the wreckage was confirmed as that of the Zuytdorp by Philip Playford.2 The Western Australian Museum (WAM), between 1974 and the late 1990s, carried out archaeological investigations of both the underwater site and the associated survivor camp area. During this time in 1992, the wreck and the surrounding lands were declared the Zuytdorp Nature Reserve, with restricted access. Diving on the wreck is prohibited, and dangerous due to access problems. Currently WAM has 1300 artefacts recorded and included in the ANCODS Collection associated with this site.3
Vergulde Draeck (1656) also known as the Gilded Dragon
The Verguilde was wrecked in 1656 south of Ledge Point. Western Australia, the Vergulde Draeck (or Gilt Dragon, as it is more commonly known) was the 'first' to relocated during the 1950/1960s rush. However, Alan Robinson (the finder) could not remember where the wreck was when he claimed to have found the site in 1957.4 Artefacts where then located on 14 April 1963, when a spear fishing group stumbled across them. James, Alan, Graeme Henderson, and John Cowan, members of the spear fishing group that discovered site, offered their rights to the site to the WAM.5 However the last member of the group, Alan Robinson, did not. WAM accepted the rights and this is generally associated with the museums commitment to underwater archaeology.6 After this, looters used explosives on the remains of the wreck to search for sellable artefacts, mainly coins.7 Due to this, the nature of the seabed and occasional severe storms, the site is spread over a 40x50m area on a reef and is very difficult to identify against the bedrock.8 Jeremy Green and staff from WAM recovered artefacts from the wreck in archaeological seasons between 1972 and 1983. Currently the ANCODS collection includes large numbers of ballast bricks, clay pipes, stoneware, wooden and metal fragments as well as elephant tusks, leather shoes and coins, eight hundred of which are in the custody of the Money Museum in Utrecht.9
Batavia (1629)
Batavia's hull remains and a replica of the portico on display in the Fremantle Shipwreck Gallery, WA
Batavia struck the reef surrounding the Wallaby Group of the Houtman Abrolhos in 1629. Survivors set up camp nearby and a small party was sent off in search of fresh water. When no water was found, the party was sent to Batavia (modern day Jakarta) to get help and to notify the government of the loss and prior mutiny aboard the ship.10 The survivors left stranded on an island, suffered several losses through murder, starvation and exposure.11 Discovered in 1963, this site is one of the more famous due to events that occurred before the wrecking and the murder in the survivor camps.12 Between 1970 and 1974, WAM recovered many artefacts from the wreck and raised the remains of the hull for display in the museum.13 Also retrieved was dismantled portico, destined for the city of Batavia&lt;U+2019&gt;s port and some human remains.14 The ANCODS collection holds 6823 artefacts related to the Batavia and the hull remains. It assembled portico are on display in WAM's Fremantle Ship Wreck Galleries.15
Zeewijk (1727)
The Zeewijk was wrecked in 1727 on the Pelsaert Group in the Houtman Abrolhos, Western Australia.16 Much of the cargo that was carried aboard was transferred to the survivor camp on Gun Island and perhaps later returned to Batavia, via the Sloepie (This ship was made by the survivors on Gun Island carried 82 people back to Batavia).17 No structure remains of the Zeewijk currently, although many artefacts have been recovered.18 Artefacts were collected in the 1840s guano diggers who dug most of the island.19 Most of these artefacts were later given to WAM. The main wreck site was identified in 1968, with some artefacts recovered including rigging, cannons, kegs of nails, wine glasses, and ceramics.20 Much of the survivor camps remains and artefacts have been destroyed by the guano diggers and wildlife. WAM holds 4196 artefacts in the ANCODS collection relating to the Zeewijk.21
Before ANCODS
It was the discovery of these ships that sparked the interest into protecting shipwrecks in Western Australia. In 1964, amendments to the Museum Act 1959 (WA) were made to include the preservation of material from wrecks for the benefit of the public, and the WAM was vested with the sole right to control historic wrecks abandoned, wrecked or stranded before 1900.2223 In 1969 a new Museum Act was enacted and the former Board of the Museum became a trustee. Much of the historic shipwreck amendments made to the previous act were kept. However, one of the biggest changes was to remove the finders reward and compensation for artefacts.24 The Museum Act 1969 was then incorporated into the Maritime Archaeology Act 1973 of WA to include changes based on the museums experience since 1964.2526 In this time Alan Robinson, one of the finders of the Vergulde Draeck, sued WAM, claiming that the legislation implemented was not valid among other claims.2728 This was proved correct over many years and from many angles the debate was held. The Commonwealth was looking into protection itself and used the end of the legal battle to release its own legislation concerning shipwrecks.29 Under the Historic Shipwrecks Act 1976 the WAM was given the power it needed to continue as it had been.30
ANCODS agreement
When the Dutch East India Company declined in the 18th century it was nationalised by the Government. The modern government therefore became the owners of the company and its ships, including wrecked vessels and as such had claim over the wrecks and their cargos.31 However, the Dutch, through agreements between the Australian Government and the WAM, proposed the ANCODS Agreement. This original proposal had been made in 1964 but the Government and the WAM took no action with it until the early 1970s.32 With the beginning of the legal battle between Robinson and the WAM, the Agreement between Australia and the Netherlands Concerning Old Dutch Shipwrecks was signed on 6 November 1972.333435 With the signing of the ANCODS agreement&quot;the Netherlands, as successor to the property and assets of the Dutch &quot;Vereenigde Oostindische Compagnie&quot;, transferred to Australia all its right, title and interest in and to wrecked vessels of the Dutch &quot;Vereenigde Oostindische Compagnie&quot; lying on or off the coast of the State of Western Australia and in and to any articles thereof and Australia accepted that right, title and interest&quot;.36 See ANCODS legislation below for the full agreement.
Activities
Controlling the interests of the ANCODS Agreement is the ANCODS Committee. This committee consists of four members, two from the Netherlands and two from Australia. Chosen for their expertise, the members are currently Dr John PS Bach OAM and Professor Geoffrey C Boulton AO for Australia, and for the Netherlands Ms Andrea Otte, a representative of the Dutch Ministry of Culture, and Mr Eric Stating, a Councillor of the Embassy of the Kingdom of the Netherlands.37 Undertaking the Secretariat duties of the committee is the Maritime Heritage Section of the Department of Sustainability, Environment, Water, Population and Communities.38 Linked to the Committee are two groups of stakeholders: four museums and government representatives, who also take part in decisions regarding the ANCODS agreement.39
In 1997 the ANCODS colloquium was held, a three day conference to discuss the position of ANCODS at the time and to provide new recommendations. Two resolutions were formed and recommendations were given: &lt;U+201C&gt;Resolution 1: In the practice of modern archaeology, it is generally accepted that the collections should remain within their original context. It is suggested that the ANCODS should promote the concept that the whole ANCODS collection should remain under the administration of the Western Australian Maritime Museum, which should administer the location, movements and loan of the collection.
Resolution 2: That the research role of ANCODS, as originally outlined in the Agreement, be expanded to encompass the concept of a joint Australian and Netherlands scientific research (JANSR), which would include education, dissemination of information, scientific research projects and community access. The ANCODS Committee should also examine the future role and aims of ANCODS.&lt;U+201D&gt; 40
Collection
As part of the ANCODS Agreement, Australia took on the responsibility to look after all the artefacts recovered from the wrecks, including their recovery, conservation, storage and display. Formally, artefacts were housed in four museums: the Western Australian Maritime Museum, The Australian National Maritime Museum, The Netherlands Maritime Museum and the Geldmuseum (Money Museum) in Utrecht . However, as part of the 1997 Colloquium, it was advised to return all artefacts to the WAM in accordance with modern archaeological standards. On 15 September 2010, the decision to hand over artefacts in the care of the Netherlands to WAM was finalised; the agreement signed by the Australian ambassador to the Netherlands, Lydia Morton, and the Netherlands Secretary for Culture, Judith van Kranendonk aboard the Batavia replica in Lelystad, The Netherlands.41 An official handover took place on 9 November 2010, by his Excellency Mr Willem Andreae, Ambassador of the Kingdom of the Netherlands, to Senator Don Farrell, the Parliamentary Secretary for Sustainability and Urban Water.42 The ceremony was held at the Australian National Maritime Museum in Sydney. To symbolise the final transfer of artefacts another ceremony was held at the Western Australian Maritime Museum on 21 February 2011. His Excellency Mr Willem Andreae handed a pewter plate recovered from the Batavia wreck to Premier Colin Barnett.43 A video of the unpacking of the last crate of artefacts can be viewed on the WAM website here: http://www.museum.wa.gov.au/explore/videos/#videos/ancods-receipt-final. As part of the repatriation of artefacts, a database has been created by the Western Australian Maritime Museum. This includes photos and descriptions of all artefacts recovered from the four VOC shipwrecks, to allow scholars access to the collections accessible here: http://www.museum.wa.gov.au/maritime-archaeology-db/ancods. Currently exhibits are being shown in the Western Australian Maritime Museum and the Australian National Maritime Museum with talk of an ANCODS exhibition in 2012 or later.4445
ANCODS legislation
{{ copy section to Wikisource }} Taken from the Historic Shipwrecks Act 1976.46
AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE NETHERLANDS AND AUSTRALIA CONCERNING OLD DUTCH SHIPWRECKS
THE UNDERSIGNED: 1. MR WIM BLOKZIJL, resident of The Hague, Head of the Inspection Division of the State Property Directorate of the Ministry of Finance, acting on behalf of the State of the Netherlands, hereinafter referred to as &quot;the Netherlands&quot;. 2. DR LLOYD DOUGLAS THOMSON, M.V.O., Australian Ambassador to the Netherlands, acting on behalf of the Government of the Commonwealth of Australia, hereinafter referred to as &quot;Australia&quot;:
HAVING REGARD TO THE FACT:
A. That vessels that belonged to the Dutch &quot;VEREENIGDE OOSTINDISCHE COMPAGNIE&quot; known as the V.O.C., hereinafter referred to as &quot;the V.O.C.&quot;, were wrecked on or off the coast of Western Australia;
B. That the Netherlands, by virtue of article 247 of the 1798 Constitution of the Batavian Republic, is the present legal successor to the V.O.C.:
AGREE AS FOLLOWS: Article 1: The Netherlands, as successor to the property and assets of the V.O.C., transfers all its right, title and interest in and to wrecked vessels of the V.O.C. lying on or off the coast of the State of Western Australia and in and to any articles thereof to Australia which shall accept such right, title and interest.
Article 2: For the purpose of this Agreement, the expression &quot;articles&quot; means any part of vessels as referred to in article 1, that have become or have been detached or removed there from, as well as the fittings, goods and other property, wherever situated, that were installed or carried on those vessels.
Article 3: Australia shall make no claim on the Netherlands for reimbursement of any costs incurred in searching for any of the vessels referred to in article 1 of this Agreement or in recovering any articles from those vessels.
Article 4: Australia recognises that the Netherlands has a continuing interest, particularly for historical and other cultural purposes, in articles recovered from any of the vessels referred to in article 1 of this Agreement. Accordingly Australia shall set up a Committee to determine the disposition and subsequent ownership of the recovered articles between the Netherlands, Australia and the State of Western Australia.
Article 5: The Committee referred to in article 4 of this Agreement shall be set up within 90 days after the entry into force of the Agreement and shall comprise two persons nominated by the Netherlands and two persons nominated by Australia. These persons shall have the scientific and cultural expertise appropriate for the discharge of their functions.
Article 6: The Committee shall determine the disposition of the recovered articles in accordance with the principles which have been agreed upon by Australia and the Netherlands and are set out in the Arrangement signed by Australia and the Netherlands and attached to this document.
Article 7: Expenditure incurred by the Committee in the performance of its work shall be shared between the two Parties represented on the Committee, the share to be borne by the Netherlands being one third and that by Australia two thirds provided that- (I) each Party shall bear the costs of travel by the Committee members nominated by it, (II) The costs of communications by a party to the Committee shall be borne by the despatching Party, and (III) The expenses of transportation of articles distributed in accordance with determinations of the Committee shall be borne by the recipients of the articles.
Article 8: If the members of the Committee referred to in article 4 of this Agreement cannot come to an agreement on the disposition of particular articles, Australia and the Netherlands shall appoint an independent consultant to report on the matter in issue and the report shall be referred to the Committee for re-consideration of the matter. The cost of the report shall be shared between the two Parties represented on the Committee, the share to be borne by the Netherlands being one third and that by Australia two thirds.
Article 9: If, on considering the consultant's report on a matter, the members of the Committee cannot come to an agreement on the disposition of the recovered articles; the matter will be referred to the Government of the Kingdom of the Netherlands and the Government of the Commonwealth of Australia, which will settle the matter by negotiation.
Article 10: This Agreement shall enter into force on the date of the signatures of both Parties.
DONE at The Hague this sixth day of November in the year One thousand nine hundred and seventy-two in two originals in the English language.
ARRANGEMENT SETTING OUT THE GUIDING PRINCIPLES FOR THE COMMITTEE TO DETERMINE THE DISPOSITION OF MATERIAL FROM THE SHIPWRECKS OF DUTCH EAST INDIA COMPANY VESSELS OFF THE COAST OF WESTERN AUSTRALIA
THE COMMITTEE Responsibility The Committee's responsibility will embrace all material recovered from the wrecks-whether recovered before or after the coming into operation of the Western Australian Museum Act in December 1964 which contains provisions for vesting in the Museum title to the wrecks of the Batavia, the Gilt Dragon, the Zuytdorp and Zeewyk.
Conduct of Business The Committee is small enough to meet if occasion demands but most of its work could be done by correspondence.
General Principles Representative collections The cost of recovery (including treatment) is likely to exceed by far the intrinsic or antiquarian sale-value of material recovered. The Government of Western Australia is spending considerable sums on this work ($92,000 in the last financial year) and estimates that the total cost will be $2,000,000 or more. Although a division would not be warranted by consideration of cash value alone, the historic, educational, scientific and international considerations are such as to make the deposition of representative collections in the museums of the Netherlands and Australia most desirable. The remainder of the material would be held in the Western Australian Museum.
Considerations governing the partition of archaeological collections In modern archaeological practice sites are no longer regarded merely as a source of important individual items, but rather as a body of material whose collective value far outweighs the importance of the individual pieces and in which the relationship of the individual objects within the sample are a major part of its historical value. Accordingly, the sharing of material from an archaeological site is best regarded as the accommodation in several localities of a corporate entity rather than its division into parts.
If the decision is made that the contents of an archaeological site are to be apportioned between two or more institutions, the first principle to be observed is that the total assemblage should be capable of reassembly to allow further statistical and scholarly analysis. It follows, therefore, that unnecessary splitting of a sample of closely similar objects capable of statistical treatment should be avoided and, where samples are accommodated in more than one institution, those institutions should contract not to disperse them further and, moreover, to agree to allow samples to be brought together for analysis and study as required. The second principle is that where unique or rare objects, themselves, form a meaningful assemblage within the whole, this assemblage should not be split or, if split, perfect replicas be made to complete the assemblage. As in the case of the division of statistical samples an agreement should be made between the recipients to reconstitute the original assemblage if it is required for scholarly research.
Treatment of material recovered The contents of the ancient shipwrecks of the Dutch East India Company Include abundant statistical samples such as coin, bricks, objects of pottery, elephant tusks, and so on. There are also many articles which are less abundant but which are duplicated many times over. Many of these are ship fittings such as cannon, anchors, cannonballs, etc. There are also other articles which are relatively rare, or even unique, in the deposits (e.g. articles possessed by crew members, or passengers, such as barber's instruments, navigational instruments, ornaments, etc.). Most articles are fragmentary and in need of immediate chemical conservation and stabilisation in the laboratory as soon as they are recovered. This treatment cannot await distribution.
Operating Principles Code of Operation The Committee will operate by reviewing proposals for distribution made, from time to time, by the Director of the Western Australian Museum; it could decide that the proposed samples be increased or decreased in content in the light of the total material collected and other factors.
General aims In its deliberations the Committee will have, as its general aim, the purpose of ensuring that representative series of statistical samples and sufficient examples of the rarer objects will be deposited in the museums of the Netherlands and Australia to convey the variety and contents of each wreck to both the public and to scholars while, at the same time, ensuring that major projects of scholarly research will not be impeded by over fragmentation of the collection. Dispersal in this way, among separate repositories will also help to ensure the permanent safety of representative material in the event of the destruction of any one repository.
Statistical samples Most material so far recovered from the vessels are samples capable of statistical treatment. A representative collection of the contents of each statistical sample should be made available to a museum of the Netherlands Government and a museum of the Commonwealth Government. Thus, in the case of coin, for example, both the Netherlands and Commonwealth Governments would receive as complete a series as possible representing the mintings and values contained within each of the wrecks. These will provide their museums with ample material of this class of objects for display purposes and sufficient to enable a scholar to make the initial qualitative studies which would possibly lead him to a more detailed statistical treatment of the bulk sample retained in the Western Australian Museum.
Less common or rare objects To ensure that both the Netherlands and Commonwealth Governments acquire, in due course, representative collections of the less common and even unique objects, the following procedure will be adopted. Since the relationships of such objects to the whole sample cannot be known until excavation is complete, the distribution of specimens of this nature cannot be considered during the continuing process of recovery. However, at reasonable intervals (of say two or three years) it should be possible to assemble a representative sample with fair certainty that all duplicates of any rare object present in a particular excavation should have been recovered and their nature taken into consideration during the deliberations of the Committee.
THE HAGUE, 6 November 1972
References
External links
http://www.heritage-activities.nl/ancods/index.html &lt;U+2013&gt; The Netherlands Heritage site
http://www.museum.wa.gov.au/research/collections/maritime-archaeology/maritime-shipwrecks &lt;U+2013&gt; Western Australian Maritime Museum Pages
https://apps5a.ris.environment.gov.au/shipwreck/public/wreck/searchSubmit.do &lt;U+2013&gt; Historic Shipwreck Database
http://www.museum.wa.gov.au/maritime-archaeology-db/ancods &lt;U+2013&gt; Western Australian Maritime Museum ANCODS Collection
http://www.environment.gov.au/heritage/shipwrecks/international/ancods.html &lt;U+2013&gt; Commonwealth Website
Category:Treaties of Australia Category:Treaties of the Netherlands Category:Treaties concluded in 1972 Category:Australia&lt;U+2013&gt;Netherlands relations Category:Shipwreck law Category:Maritime archaeology Category:Shipwrecks of Western Australia Category:Articles created via the Article Wizard
↩
↩
↩
Kennedy, G.A. 1998 Discovery, Legislation, and Litigation, in Green, J., Stanbury, M., and Gaastra, F.(eds) 'The ANCODS Colloquium: Papers presented at the Australia-Netherlands Colloquium on Maritime Archaeology and Maritime History'. Western Australian Maritime Museum, Fremantle. pp30-36.↩
↩
↩
Staniforth, S. and Nash, M. (eds) 2006 Maritime Archaeology: Australian Approaches. The Plenum Series in Underwater Archaeology. Springer, New York p.2.↩
↩
Historic Shipwrecks Act 1976, Preamble. URL:http://www.comlaw.gov.au/Details/C2004C04468.↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
Historic Shipwrecks Act 1976. URL:http://www.comlaw.gov.au/Details/C2004C04468.↩
