The Yom Kippur War, Ramadan War or October War (; transliterated: Milkhemet Yom HaKipurim or &lt;U+05DE&gt;&lt;U+05DC&gt;&lt;U+05D7&gt;&lt;U+05DE&gt;&lt;U+05EA&gt; &lt;U+05D9&gt;&lt;U+05D5&gt;&lt;U+05DD&gt; &lt;U+05DB&gt;&lt;U+05D9&gt;&lt;U+05E4&gt;&lt;U+05D5&gt;&lt;U+05E8&gt;, Milkhemet Yom Kipur; ; transliterated: &lt;U+0127&gt;arb October or &lt;U+062D&gt;&lt;U+0631&gt;&lt;U+0628&gt; &lt;U+062A&gt;&lt;U+0634&gt;&lt;U+0631&gt;&lt;U+064A&gt;&lt;U+0646&gt;, &lt;U+0127&gt;arb Tishrin), also known as the 1973 Arab-Israeli War and the Fourth Arab-Israeli War, was fought from October 6 to October 26, 1973 by a coalition of Arab states led by Egypt and Syria against Israel. The war began with a surprise joint attack by Egypt and Syria on Yom Kippur, the Jewish day of atonement. Egypt and Syria crossed the cease-fire lines in the Sinai and Golan Heights, respectively, which had been captured by Israel in 1967 during the Six-Day War.1
The Egyptians and the Syrians advanced during the first 24–48 hours, after which momentum began to swing in Israel's favor. By the second week of the war, the Syrians had been pushed out of the Golan Heights. In the Sinai to the south, the Israelis struck at the seam between two invading Egyptian armies, crossed the Suez Canal (where the old ceasefire line had been), and cut off the Egyptian Third Army just as a United Nations cease-fire came into effect.
The war had far-reaching implications for many nations. The Arab World, which had been humiliated by the lopsided defeat of the Egyptian-Syrian-Jordanian alliance during the Six-Day War, felt psychologically vindicated by its string of victories early in the conflict. This vindication paved the way for the peace process that followed, as well as liberalizations such as Egypt's infitah policy. The Camp David Accords, which came soon after, led to normalized relations between Egypt and Israel—the first time any Arab country had recognized the Israeli state. Egypt, which had already been drifting away from the Soviet Union, then left the Soviet sphere of influence entirely.
Background
Casus belli
This war was part of the Arab-Israeli conflict, an ongoing dispute which has included many battles and wars since 1948 when the state of Israel was formed. During the Six-Day War of 1967, the Israelis captured Egypt's Sinai Peninsula all the way up to the Suez Canal, which had become the cease-fire line, and roughly half of Syria's Golan Heights.
In the years following that war, Israel erected lines of fortification in both the Sinai and the Golan Heights. In 1971 Israel spent $500 million fortifying its positions on the Suez Canal, a chain of fortifications and gigantic earthworks known as the Bar Lev Line, named after Israeli General Chaim Bar-Lev.
Nonetheless, according to Chaim Herzog:
On June 19, 1967, the National Unity Government of Israel voted unanimously to return the Sinai to Egypt and the Golan Heights to Syria in return for peace agreements. The Golans would have to be demilitarized and special arrangement would be negotiated for the Straits of Tiran. The government also resolved to open negotiations with King Hussein of Jordan regarding the Eastern border.''2
The Israeli decision was to be conveyed to the Arab states by the U.S. government. The U.S. was informed of the decision, but not that it was to transmit it. There is no evidence of receipt from Egypt or Syria, who thus apparently never received the offer. The decision was kept a closely-guarded secret within Israeli government circles and the offer was withdrawn in October, 1967.3
Egypt and Syria both desired a return of the land lost in the Six-Day War. However, the Khartoum Arab Summit issued the &quot;three no's&quot;, resolving that there would be &quot;no peace, no recognition and no negotiation with Israel.&quot;
President Gamal Abdel Nasser of Egypt died in September 1970. He was succeeded by Anwar Sadat, who resolved to fight Israel and win back the territory lost in the Six-Day War. In 1971, Sadat, in response to an initiative by UN intermediary Gunnar Jarring, declared that if Israel committed itself to &quot;withdrawal of its armed forces from Sinai and the Gaza Strip&quot; and to implementation of other provisions of UN Security Council Resolution 242 as requested by Jarring, Egypt would then &quot;be ready to enter into a peace agreement with Israel.&quot; Israel responded that it would not withdraw to the pre-June 5, 1967 lines.4
Sadat hoped that by inflicting even a limited defeat on the Israelis, the status quo could be altered. Hafiz al-Assad, the head of Syria, had a different view. He had little interest in negotiation and felt the retaking of the Golan Heights would be a purely military option. Since the Six-Day War, Assad had launched a massive military buildup and hoped to make Syria the dominant military power of the Arab states. With the aid of Egypt, Assad felt that his new army could win convincingly against the Israeli army and thus secure Syria's role in the region. Assad only saw negotiations beginning once the Golan Heights had been retaken by force, which would induce Israel to give up the West Bank and Gaza, and make other concessions.
Sadat also had important domestic concerns in wanting war. &quot;The three years since Sadat had taken office&lt;U+2026&gt; were the most demoralized in Egyptian history&lt;U+2026&gt; A desiccated economy added to the nation's despondency. War was a desperate option.&quot;5 In his biography of Sadat, Raphael Israeli argued that Sadat felt the root of the problem was in the great shame over the Six-Day War, and before any reforms could be introduced he felt that shame had to be overcome. Egypt's economy was in shambles, but Sadat knew that the deep reforms that he felt were needed would be deeply unpopular among parts of the population. A military victory would give him the popularity he needed to make changes. A portion of the Egyptian population, most prominently university students who launched wide protests, strongly desired a war to reclaim the Sinai and was highly upset that Sadat had not launched one in his first three years in office.
The other Arab states showed much more reluctance to fully commit to a new war. King Hussein of Jordan feared another major loss of territory as had occurred in the Six-Day War, during which Jordan had been halved in population. Sadat was also backing the claim of the PLO to the territories (West Bank and Gaza) and in the event of a victory promised Yasser Arafat that he would be given control of them. Hussein still saw the West Bank as part of Jordan and wanted it restored to his kingdom. Moreover, during the Black September crisis of 1970, a near civil war had broken out between the PLO and the Jordanian government. In that war, Syria had intervened militarily on the side of the PLO, estranging Assad and Hussein.
Iraq and Syria also had strained relations, and the Iraqis refused to join the initial offensive. Lebanon, which shared a border with Israel, was not expected to join the Arab war effort due to its small army and already evident instability. The months before the war saw Sadat engage in a diplomatic offensive to try to win support for the war. By the fall of 1973, he claimed the backing of more than a hundred states. These were most of the countries of the Arab League, Non-Aligned Movement, and Organization of African Unity. Sadat had also worked to curry favour in Europe and had some success before the war. Britain and France for the first time sided with the Arab powers against Israel on the United Nations Security Council.
Events leading up to the war
Anwar Sadat in 1972 publicly stated that Egypt was committed to going to war with Israel, and that they were prepared to &quot;sacrifice one million Egyptian soldiers.&quot; From the end of 1972, Egypt began a concentrated effort to build up its forces, receiving MiG-21 jet fighters, SA-2, SA-3, SA-6 and SA-7 antiaircraft missiles, T-55 and T-62 tanks, RPG-7 antitank weapons, and the AT-3 Sagger anti-tank guided missile from the Soviet Union and improving its military tactics, based on Soviet battlefield doctrines. Political generals, who had in large part been responsible for the rout in 1967, were replaced with competent ones.6
The role of the superpowers, too, was a major factor in the outcome of the two wars. The policy of the Soviet Union was one of the causes of Egypt's military weakness. President Nasser was only able to obtain the material for an anti-aircraft missile defense wall after visiting Moscow and pleading with the Kremlin leaders. He claimed that if supplies were not given, he would have to return to Egypt and tell the Egyptian people Moscow had abandoned them, and then relinquish power to one of his peers who would be able to deal with the Americans. The Americans would then have the upper hand in the region, which Moscow could not permit.
One of Egypt's undeclared objectives of the War of Attrition was to force the Soviet Union to supply Egypt with more advanced arms and war materiel. Egypt felt the only way to convince the Soviet leaders of the deficiencies of most of the aircraft and air defense weaponry supplied to Egypt following 1967 was to put the Soviet weapons to the test against the advanced weaponry the United States had supplied to Israel.
Nasser's policy following the 1967 defeat conflicted with that of the Soviet Union. The Soviets sought to avoid a new conflagration between the Arabs and Israelis so as not to be drawn into a confrontation with the United States. The reality of the situation became apparent when the superpowers met in Oslo and agreed to maintain the status quo. This was unacceptable to Egyptian leaders, and when it was discovered that the Egyptian preparations for crossing the canal were being leaked, it became imperative to expel the Soviets from Egypt. In July 1972, Sadat expelled almost all of the 20,000 Soviet military advisers in the country and reoriented the country's foreign policy to be more favorable to the United States. The Syrians remained close to the Soviet Union.
The Soviets thought little of Sadat's chances in any war. They warned that any attempt to cross the heavily fortified Suez would incur massive losses. The Soviets, who were then pursuing d&lt;U+00E9&gt;tente, had no interest in seeing the Middle East destabilized. In a June 1973 meeting with U.S. President Richard Nixon, Soviet leader Leonid Brezhnev had proposed Israel pull back to its 1967 border. Brezhnev said that if Israel did not, &quot;we will have difficulty keeping the military situation from flaring up&quot;—an indication that the Soviet Union had been unable to restrain Sadat's plans.7
In an interview published in Newsweek (April 9, 1973), President Sadat again threatened war with Israel. Several times during 1973, Arab forces conducted large-scale exercises that put the Israeli military on the highest level of alert, only to be recalled a few days later. The Israeli leadership already believed that if an attack took place, the Israeli Air Force could repel it.
Almost a full year before the war, in an October 24, 1972 meeting with his Supreme Council of the Armed Forces, Sadat declared his intention to go to war with Israel even without proper Soviet support.8 Planning began in 1971, and was done in absolute secrecy—even the upper-echelon commanders were not told of war plans until less than a week prior to the attack, and the soldiers were not told until a few hours beforehand. The plan to attack Israel in concert with Syria was code-named Operation Badr (the Arabic word for &quot;full moon&quot;), after the Battle of Badr, in which Muslims under Muhammad defeated the Quraish tribe of Mecca.
Lead up to the surprise attack
The IDF's Directorate of Military Intelligence's (abbreviated as &quot;Aman&quot;) Research Department was responsible for formulating Israel's intelligence estimate. Their assessments on the likelihood of war were based on several assumptions. First, it was assumed correctly that Syria would not go to war with Israel unless Egypt went to war as well. Second, the department learned from a high-ranking Egyptian informant that Egypt wanted to regain all of the Sinai, but would not go to war until they were supplied MiG-23 fighter-bombers to neutralize the Israeli Air Force, and Scud missiles to be used against Israeli cities as a deterrent against Israeli attacks on Egyptian infrastructure. Since they had not received MiG-23s, and Scud missiles had only arrived in Egypt from Bulgaria in late August and it would take four months to train the Egyptian ground crews, Aman predicted war with Egypt was not imminent. This assumption about Egypt's strategic plans, known as &quot;the concept&quot;, strongly prejudiced the department's thinking and led it to dismiss other war warnings. It was later revealed in a book published by London-based Israeli historian Roni Bregman that the informant (or possible double agent) was none other than Ashraf Marwan, an Egyptian political insider.9
The Egyptians did much to further this misconception. Both the Israelis and the Americans felt that the expulsion of the Soviet military observers had severely reduced the effectiveness of the Egyptian army. The Egyptians ensured that there was a continual stream of false information on maintenance problems and a lack of personnel to operate the most advanced equipment. The Egyptians made repeated misleading reports about lack of spare parts that also made their way to the Israelis. Sadat had so long engaged in brinkmanship, that his frequent war threats were being ignored by the world. In May and August 1973 the Egyptian army had engaged in exercises by the border and mobilizing in response both times had cost the Israeli army some $10 million.
For the week leading up to Yom Kippur, the Egyptian army staged a week-long training exercise adjacent to the Suez Canal. Israeli intelligence, detecting large troop movements towards the canal, dismissed these movements as mere training exercises. Movements of Syrian troops towards the border were puzzling, but not a threat because, Aman believed, they would not attack without Egypt and Egypt would not attack until the weaponry they wanted arrived.
On September 27 and September 30, two batches of reservists were called up by the Egyptian army to participate in these exercises. Two days before the outbreak of the war, on October 4, the Egyptian command publicly announced the demobilization of part of the reservists called up during September 27 to lull suspicion on the Israeli side. Around 20,000 troops were demobilized, and subsequently some of these men were given leave to perform the Umrah (pilgrimage) to Mecca. 1011
The obvious reason for choosing the Jewish holiday of Yom Kippur for staging a surprise attack on Israel was that on this specific day (unlike any other holiday) the country comes to a complete standstill. On Yom Kippur, the holiest day for Jews, not only observant, but most secular Jews fast, abstain from any use of fire, electricity, engines, communications, etc., and all road traffic comes to a standstill. Many soldiers leave military facilities for home during the holiday and Israel is most vulnerable, especially with much of its army demobilized. The war also coincided with the Muslim month of Ramadan, meaning that many of the Muslim soldiers were also fasting. Many others believe that the attack on Yom Kippur surprisingly helped Israel to easily marshal reserves from their homes and synagogues, because the nature of the holiday meant that roads and communication would be largely open, to help organize and mobilize the military.
Despite refusing to participate, King Hussein of Jordan ''&quot;had met with Sadat and [Syrian President] Assad in Alexandria two weeks before. Given the mutual suspicions prevailing among the Arab leaders, it was unlikely that he had been told any specific war plans. But it was probable that Sadat and Assad had raised the prospect of war against Israel in more general terms to feel out the likelihood of Jordan joining in.&quot;''12 On the night of September 25, Hussein secretly flew to Tel Aviv to warn Israeli Prime Minister Golda Meir of an impending Syrian attack. &quot;Are they going to war without the Egyptians, asked Mrs. Meir. The king said he didn't think so. 'I think they [Egypt] would cooperate'&quot;.13 Surprisingly, this warning fell on deaf ears. Aman concluded that the king had not told it anything it did not already know. &quot;Eleven warnings of war were received by Israel during September from well placed sources. But [Mossad chief] Zvi Zamir continued to insist that war was not an Arab option. Not even Hussein's warnings succeeded in stirring his doubts&quot;.14 He would later remark that &quot;We simply didn't feel them capable [of War]&quot;15
Finally, Zvi Zamir personally went to Europe to meet with Marwan, at midnight on October 5/6th. Marwan informed him that a joint Syrian-Egyptian attack on Israel was imminent. It was this warning in particular, combined with the large number of other warnings, that finally goaded the Israeli high command into action. Just hours before the attack began, orders went out for a partial call-up of the Israeli reserves.16 Ironically, calling up the reserves proved to be easier than usual, as almost all of the troops were at synagogue or at home for the holiday.
Lack of an Israeli pre-emptive attack
Upon learning of the impending attack, Prime Minister of Israel Golda Meir made the controversial decision not to launch a pre-emptive strike.
The Israeli strategy was, for the most part, based on the precept that if war was imminent, Israel would launch a pre-emptive strike. It was assumed that Israel's intelligence services would give, at the worst case, about 48 hours notice prior to an Arab attack.
Golda Meir, Moshe Dayan, and Israeli general David Elazar met at 8:05 a.m. the morning of Yom Kippur, six hours before the war was to begin. Dayan opened the meeting by arguing that war was not a certainty. Elazar then presented his argument, in favor of a pre-emptive attack against Syrian airfields at noon, Syrian missiles at 3:00 p.m., and Syrian ground forces at 5:00 p.m. &quot;When the presentations were done, the prime minister hemmed uncertainly for a few moments but then came to a clear decision. There would be no preemptive strike. Israel might be needing American assistance soon and it was imperative that it not be blamed for starting the war. 'If we strike first, we won't get help from anybody', she said.&quot;17 European nations, under threat of an Arab oil embargo and trade boycott, had stopped supplying Israel with munitions. As a result, Israel was totally dependent on the United States to resupply its army, and was particularly sensitive to anything that might endanger that relationship. After Meir had made her decision, a message arrived from Henry Kissinger: &quot;Don't preempt.&quot;18 Had Israel struck first, according to Henry Kissinger, they would not have received &quot;so much as a nail&quot;.
David Elazar proposed a mobilization of the entire Air Force and four armored divisions, a total of 100,000 to 120,000 troops, while Dayan favored a mobilization of the Air Force and two armored divisions, totaling around 70,000 troops. Meir sided with Elazar's proposal, and the mobilization proceeded.19
Combat operations
In the Sinai
The Egyptian units would not advance beyond a shallow strip for fear of losing protection of their SAM batteries, which were situated on the West bank of the canal. In the Six-Day War, the Israeli Air Force had pummelled the defenseless Arab armies. Egypt (and Syria) had heavily fortified their side of the cease-fire lines with SAM batteries provided by the Soviet Union, against which the Israeli Air Force had no effective countermeasures. Israel, which had invested much of its defense budget building the region's strongest air force, would see its air force rendered almost useless by the presence of the SAM batteries.
Anticipating a swift Israeli armored counterattack by three armored brigades stationed behind the Bar Lev line,20 the Egyptians had armed their assault force with large numbers of man-portable anti-tank weapons—rocket propelled grenades and the less numerous but more advanced Sagger guided missiles, which proved devastating to the first Israeli armored counter-attacks. Each of the five infantry divisions that was to cross the canal had been equipped with RPG-7 rockets and RPG-43 grenades, and reinforced with an ATGW battalion as they would not have any armor support for nearly 12 hours.21 The problem of transporting this equipment was overcome by using two-man teams pulling two-wheeled carts which increased the amount possible to transport by the men by six. A total of 336 tons was transported across the canal and beyond on 2,240 carts.22 In addition, the Egyptians had built separate ramps at the crossing points, reaching as high as 21 meters to counter the Israeli ramp and provide covering fire for the assaulting infantry and to counter the first Israeli armored counterattacks.23 The scale and effectiveness of the Egyptian strategy of deploying these anti-tank weapons coupled with the Israelis' inability to disrupt their use with close air support (due to the SAM shield) greatly contributed to Israeli losses early in the war.
The 1973 War in the Sinai, October 6&lt;U+2013&gt;15.
The Egyptian army put great effort into finding a quick and effective way of breaching the Israeli defenses. The Israelis had built large 18 meter high barricades made primarily from sand and reinforced with concrete. Egyptian engineers initially experimented with explosive charges and bulldozers to clear the obstacles, before a junior officer proposed using high pressure water cannons. The idea was tested and found to be a sound one, and several high pressure water cannons were imported from Britain and from East Germany. The Egyptian forces used these water-cannons loaded with water from the Suez Canal. The water-cannons effectively blasted away the barricades.24
At 2:05 pm, a large air strike involving 200-250 Egyptian Aircraft flying at very low altitudes conducted simultaneous strikes against three airbases and airfields, ten Hawk SAM sites, major command posts, electronic jamming centers, radar stations, two long-range artillery positions, and a fortified strongpoint east of Port Fuad. The Egyptian Command estimated that the EAF pilots had accomplished 95 per cent of their mission targets with negligible losses of only 5 aircraft.252627 This was coupled with a barrage from more than 2000 artillery pieces for a period of 53 minutes, against the Bar Lev Line defenses and pillboxes, and also against command posts and tank concentration areas. 28
Under cover of this artillery barrage, 4,000 Egyptian troops then crossed the Suez Canal at 2:05 in nearly 720 rubber assault rafts, in what became known as The Crossing, and these were joined by subsequent waves until the entire assault force of 32,000 men had crossed the canal in three and a half hours. The infantry, with no armor support of their own, managed to capture or destroy all but one of the Bar-Lev forts. 29 Commando detachments bypassed the defenses and headed for tank platforms, laying mines and conducting ambushes against Israeli tanks, preventing the IDF armor from interfering with follow-up waves of Egyptian forces crossing the canal. At 2:30 the Egyptian flag was raised on the eastern side of the canal, and at 2:46 Egyptian soldiers captured the first fortified position. Engineer Corps began to construct bridges across the canal under artillery cover and with infantry support. At 5:50, commando battalions, were transported by helicopters deep into the Sinai, as far as 40 km east of the canal, to hamper Israeli reserves and prevent their intervention.3031 The Israeli air force conducted air interdiction operations to prevent the bridges from being erected, but were met with heavy resistance from SAM batteries; thirteen Israeli aircraft were downed from the time of the crossing till 5:00 pm. These attacks were overall ineffective, as bridges that were destroyed were quickly repaired and made functional again by engineers.32 The Israeli brigade garrisoning the Bar-Lev forts was overwhelmed. After less than six hours, fifteen fortifications had been captured, and Egyptian forces advanced several kilometers. Once the bridges had been laid, additional infantry with the remaining portable and recoilless AT weapons began to cross the canal, while the first Egyptian tanks started to cross at 8:30, and eighteen hours after the assault, five infantry divisions and 850 tanks had crossed the canal33
An amphibious brigade consisting of 1,000 soldiers, 20 PT-76 tanks and 80 APC's crossed the Bitter Lakes on October 6. Its objective was the disruption of enemy command and communication systems along the Mitla and Gedy Passes. The brigade managed to attack Israeli radar and electronic equipment installations along these passes, and attack the airbase at Bir-el-Thamada during October 7-8, before finally returning to Egyptian lines on the canal.34
Only one fortification, code named Budapest (the northernmost Bar-Lev fort), would remain in Israeli control through the end of the war.
The crossing was completed with few casualties on the Egyptian side: 280 men killed with the loss of 5 aircraft and 20 tanks. On the other hand, Israeli losses by the morning of October 7 were considerably higher; General Mandler reported that his armored division's tanks had gone down to 100 from 291, while Shomron Armored Brigade in the south had decreased from 100 tanks to just 23. In all, 300 Israeli tanks were destroyed during the Egyptian assault on the Bar-Lev, and the infantry brigade manning the Bar-Lev line was annihilated.35 At around 16:00 Elazar learned that IAF losses in the first 27 hours of the war reached 30 aircraft.36
In a meticulously rehearsed operation, the Egyptian forces advanced approximately 4 to 5 km into the Sinai desert with the combined forces of two armies (both by Western standards corps-sized, which included the 2nd Infantry Division in the northern 2nd Army). 37 The Egyptian forces then consolidated their initial positions. On October 7 the bridgeheads were enlarged an additional 4 km, at the same time repulsing Israeli counter-attacks. By the evening of October 7 the 18th Infantry Division had managed to control most of the town of Qantara, and finally liberated it the following night after intense street battles.3839
On October 8, Shmuel Gonen, commander of the Israeli Southern front—who had only taken the position 3 months before at the retirement of Ariel Sharon—ordered a counterattack by the three brigades of Abraham Adan's 162nd Armored Division. However, one of Adan's brigades was stuck in a traffic jam, and the other two were each at half-strength.40. They attacked entrenched Egyptian forces at Hizayon, but approaching tanks were easily destroyed by Saggers fired from the Egyptian ramp. The result was a disaster for the Israelis. Towards nightfall, a counterattack by the Egyptians was stopped by Ariel Sharon's 143rd Armoured Division—Sharon had been reinstated as a division commander at the outset of the war. The fighting subsided, with neither side wanting to mount a large attack against the other. Israeli losses in these early battles in the Sinai were 49 planes and approximately 500 tanks.41 Despite this, the IAF increased its attacks during the following days on Egyptian positions along the canal.42
Throughout the front on October 9, the Egyptian forces continued to conduct probing attacks to consolidate and expand their bridgeheads, which were met with costly Israeli counterattacks, conducted in the same way as the attacks made on October 8. Throughout these two days, the Israelis had lost a total of 260 tanks.43 In Sharon's sector, the 16th Infantry Division made an attempt to seize important ridges, during which Brigadier General Shafik Mirti Sedrak lost his life. Sharon, in response, ordered a number of counterattacks throughout the day, in clear contravention of Elazar's decision to shift to the defensive. Second Army command dispatched a tank battalion to assist the 16th Division in repelling the Israeli counterattacks. Meanwhile, two Israeli armored brigades made attacks to regain positions at Hamutal, Televiza and Machshir, but failed to capture any positions. By nightfall, Sharon had lost a further 50 tanks without making any gains, although the Israelis succeeded in extracting the garrison at the Purkan strongpoint.44
After learning of Sharon's disobedient actions, Elazar became furious. But rather than remove Sharon, who was considered innovative, he opted to replace Gonen, who had proven to be out of his depth, with Chaim Bar-Lev, brought out of retirement. Because it was considered dangerous to morale to replace the front commander during the middle of a battle, rather than being sacked, Gonen was made chief of staff to the newly appointed Bar-Lev. By October 10, both sides had settled into an operational pause.45
 After several days of waiting, it became clear to the Egyptian Command that Israeli efforts were concentrated against Syrian forces on the Golan. Sadat, wanting to ease pressure on the Syrians, ordered his chief generals (Saad El Shazly and Ahmad Ismail Ali chief among them) to attack. The 2nd and 3rd Armies were to attack eastward at the same time with their forces, leaving behind five infantry divisions to hold the bridgeheads. The attacking forces, consisting of 400 tanks46 would not have SAM cover, so the EAF was tasked with the defense of these forces from Israeli air attacks. Armored and mechanized units began the attack on October 14 with artillery support. They were up against 600 Israeli tanks, supported by infantry with SS.11 and newly delivered TOW missiles (the IDF had roughly 60,000 infantry in the Sinai by October 14)4748 &quot;The attack, the most massive since the initial Egyptian assault on Yom Kippur, was a total failure, the first major Egyptian reversal of the war. Instead of concentrating forces of maneuvering, except for the wadi thrust, they had expended them in head-on attack against the waiting Israeli brigades. Egyptian losses for the day were estimated at between 150 and 250 tanks.&quot;49
The following day, October 15, the Israelis launched Operation Abiray-Lev (&quot;Valiant&quot; or &quot;Stouthearted Men&quot;)—the counterattack against the Egyptians and crossing of the Suez Canal. The attack was a tremendous change of tactics for the Israelis, who had previously relied on air and tank support—support that had been decimated by the well-prepared Egyptian forces. Instead, the Israelis used infantry to infiltrate the positions of the Egyptian SAM and anti-tank batteries, which were unable to cope as well with forces on foot. Based on the assumption that the Egyptians had returned to their 1967 form following the failed attack on October 14, Stouthearted Men called for a one day crossing of the Suez Canal and another day for a lightning dash towards Suez. These timetables proved unduly optimistic.50
The 143rd Armoured Division led by Major General Ariel Sharon and Adan's 162nd Armored Division, attacked the Egyptian line just north of Bitter Lake, in the vicinity of Ismailiya. The Israelis struck at a weak point in the Egyptian line, the &quot;seam&quot; between the Egyptian Second Army in the north and the Egyptian Third Army in the south. In three days of some of the most brutal fighting of the war in and around the Chinese Farm (an irrigation project east of the canal and north of the crossing point), the Israelis opened a hole in the Egyptian line and reached the Suez Canal. Ahead of the main Israeli forces a paratrooper brigade commanded by Colonel Danny Matt crossed the canal closely followed by 30 tanks in the early hours of October 16 unopposed, and subsequently established a bridgehead 5 km deep. The brigade was cut off from Israeli units for nearly 24 hours as the battle continued in the Chinese Farm. An Egyptian infantry brigade launched an attack in the morning of October 16, advancing to within under a mile from the canal, before mounting losses forced the brigade to pull back. Sharon sent out raiding units against SAM units, and although only around three batteries were knocked out of action, the Egyptian Command decided to pull back the remaining batteries to safer positions, decreasing their effectiveness and enabling the Israeli Air Force to provide support to its troops.515253
Prior to the war, fearing an Israeli crossing of the canal, no Western nation would supply the Israelis with bridging equipment. They were able to purchase and refurbish obsolete modular pontoon bridging equipment from a French WWII scrap lot. The Israelis also constructed a rather sophisticated indigenous &quot;roller bridge&quot; but logistical delays involving heavy congestion on the roads leading to the crossing point delayed its arrival to the canal for several days. Deploying the pontoon bridge on the night of October 16/17, Adan's 162nd Division crossed on the night of October 17/18. An Egyptian paratrooper brigade, which had been directing effective artillery fire against the Israeli crossing area, was pushed northwards by Sharon's division until they lost sight of the crossing area. This decreased the effectiveness of the Egyptian artillery, and by morning on October 19 the Israelis put their second bridge across, although intercepted radio messages continued to indicate heavy Israeli losses. Sharon's division of one paratroop and three armored brigades, proceeded to advance northwards in an attempt to capture Ismailia and cut off Second Army's main supply lines. A combined force of two paratrooper brigades and an armored brigade halted this thrust 10 km south of Ismailia in four days of battle from October 18 to October 22, inflicting heavy casualties on Israeli armor and Matt's paratroopers. Meanwhile Adan, having crossed on October 17, headed south, intent on cutting off the Egyptian Third Army. By the end of the war the Israelis were well within Egypt, reaching a point 101 kilometers from its capital, Cairo.545556 The Egyptians maintained control of the captured Bar-Lev Line and had 70,000 men and 720 tanks on the East bank of the canal.57
On the Golan Heights
In the Golan Heights, the Syrians attacked the Israeli defenses of two brigades and eleven artillery batteries with five divisions and 188 batteries. At the onset of the battle, 180 Israeli tanks and 60 Israeli artillery pieces faced off against approximately 1,300 Syrian tanks.58 Every Israeli tank deployed on the Golan Heights was engaged during the initial attacks. Syrian commandos dropped by helicopter also took the most important Israeli stronghold at Jabal al Shaikh (Mount Hermon), which had a variety of surveillance equipment. 
Fighting in the Golan Heights was given priority by the Israeli High Command. The fighting in the Sinai was sufficiently far away that the Israeli population centers were not immediately threatened; should the Golan Heights fall, the Syrians could easily advance towards Tiberias, Safed, Haifa, Netanya, and Tel Aviv. Reservists were directed to the Golan as quickly as possible. They were assigned to tanks and sent to the front as soon as they arrived at army depots, without waiting for the crews they trained with to arrive, without waiting for machine guns to be installed on their tanks, and without taking the time to calibrate their tank guns (a time-consuming process known as bore-sighting).
As the Egyptians had in the Sinai, the Syrians on the Golan Heights took care to stay under cover of their SAM batteries. Also as in the Sinai, the Syrians made use of Soviet anti-tank weapons (which, because of the uneven terrain, were not as effective as in the flat Sinai desert).
The Syrians had expected it would take at least 24 hours for Israeli reserves to reach the front lines; in fact, Israeli reserve units began reaching the battle lines only fifteen hours after the war began.
By the end of the first day of battle, the Syrians (who at the start outnumbered the Israelis in the Golan 5 to 1, and in some cases, 11 to 1. Syrian tanks out numbered Israeli tanks 10 to 1) had achieved moderate success. The Israelis put up fierce resistance, as tanks and infantry desperately tried to fend off the Syrians. They made use of mobile artillery, and used it with deadly effect-the Israeli gunners had practiced on the Golan heights numerous time- and were effective. Syrian SAM batteries shot down 40 Israeli planes, but Israeli pilots soon adopted a different tactic- flying in low over Jordan- swooping in over the Golan heights, catching the Syrians in the flank and avoiding many of the batteries. The Israeli pilots dropped both conventional explosives and napalm bombs, and wrecked Syrian vehicles soon littered the ground. Yet within six hours, the first Israeli line of defense had been overrun by sheer weight of numbers.
A Syrian tank brigade passing through the Rafid Gap turned northwest up a little-used route known as the Tapline Road, which cut diagonally across the Golan. This roadway would prove one of the main strategic hinges of the battle. It led straight from the main Syrian breakthrough points to Nafah, which was not only the location of Israeli divisional headquarters but the most important crossroads on the Heights.59
During the night, Lieutenant Zvika Greengold, who had just arrived to the battle unattached to any unit, fought them off with his single tank until help arrived.
For the next 20 hours, Zvika Force, as he came to be known on the radio net, fought running battles with Syrian tanks—sometimes alone, sometimes as part of a larger unit, changing tanks half a dozen times as they were knocked out. He was wounded and burned but stayed in action and repeatedly showed up at critical moments from an unexpected direction to change the course of a skirmish.60
For his actions, Zvika became a national hero in Israel.
During over four days of fighting, the Israeli 7th Armoured Brigade in the north (commanded by Yanush Ben Gal) managed to hold the rocky hill line defending the northern flank of their headquarters in Nafah. For some as-yet-unexplained reason, the Syrians were close to reaching the Israeli defenders at Nafah, yet they stopped the advance on Nafah's fences, letting Israel assemble a defensive line. The most reasonable explanation for this is that the Syrians had calculated estimated advances, and the commanders in the field didn't want to digress from the plan. To the south, however, the Barak Armored Brigade, bereft of any natural defenses, began to take heavy casualties. Israeli Brigade Commander Colonel Shoham was killed during the second day of fighting, along with his second in command and their Operations Officer (each in a separate tank), as the Syrians desperately tried to advance towards the Sea of Galilee and Nafah. At this point, the Brigade stopped functioning as a cohesive force, although the surviving tanks and crewmen continued fighting independently. However, the Syrians were also taking heavy casualties. Israeli tanks raining shells at the advancing Syrians had caused heavy casualties, and Syrian brigadier general Omar Abrash was killed when his command tank took a direct hit.
The tide in the Golan began to turn as the arriving Israeli reserve forces were able to contain and, starting on October 8, push back the Syrian offensive. The tiny Golan Heights were too small to act as an effective territorial buffer, unlike the Sinai Peninsula in the south, but it proved to be a strategic geographical stronghold and was a crucial key in preventing the Syrian army from bombarding the cities below. By Wednesday, October 10, the last Syrian unit in the Central sector had been pushed back across the Purple Line, that is, the pre-war border.61
A decision now had to be made—whether to stop at the 1967 border, or to continue into Syrian territory. Israeli High Command spent the entire October 10 debating this well into the night. Some favored disengagement, which would allow soldiers to be redeployed to the Sinai (Shmuel Gonen's defeat at Hizayon in the Sinai had happened two days earlier). Others favored continuing the attack into Syria, towards Damascus, which would knock Syria out of the war; it would also restore Israel's image as the supreme military power in the Middle East and would give them a valuable bargaining chip once the war ended. Others countered that Syria had strong defenses—antitank ditches, minefields, and strongpoints— and that it would be better to fight from defensive positions in the Golan Heights (rather than the flat terrain of Syria) in the event of another war with Syria. However, Prime Minister Meir realized the most crucial point of the whole debate:
It would take four days to shift a division to the Sinai. If the war ended during this period, the war would end with a territorial loss for Israel in the Sinai and no gain in the north—an unmitigated defeat. This was a political matter and her decision was unmitigating—to cross the purple line&lt;U+2026&gt; The attack would be launched tomorrow, Thursday, October 11.62
From October 11 to October 14, the Israeli forces pushed into Syria, but Syrian reservists put up stiff resistance from prepared defenses. The Israelis continued their advance, and reached the main defensive line around Sassa. The Israelis had conquered a further 50 square-kilometers box of territory in the Bashan. From there they would have been able to shell the outskirts of Damascus, only 40 km away, using heavy artillery. Syrian MIG fighters swooped in on the Israelis, as part of the desperate defense of Damascus.
As Arab position on the battlefields deteriorated, pressure mounted on King Hussein to send his Army into action. He found a way to meet these demands without opening his kingdom to Israeli air attack. Instead of attacking Israel from their common border, he sent an expeditionary force into Syria. He let Israel know of his intentions, through US intermediaries, in the hope that it [Israel] would accept that this was not a casus belli justifying an attack into Jordan&lt;U+2026&gt; Dayan declined to offer any such assurance, but Israel had no intention of opening another front.63
Iraq also sent an expeditionary force to the Golan, consisting of some 30,000 men, 250-500 tanks, and 700 APCs.6465 The Iraqi divisions were actually a strategic surprise for the IDF, which expected a 24-hour-plus advance intelligence of such moves. This turned into an operational surprise, as the Iraqis attacked the exposed southern flank of the advancing Israeli armor, forcing its advance units to retreat a few kilometers, in order to prevent encirclement.
Combined Syrian, Iraqi and Jordanian counterattacks prevented any further Israeli gains. However, they were also unable to push the Israelis back from the Bashan salient.
On October 22, the Golani Brigade and Sayeret Matkal commandos recaptured the outpost on Mount Hermon, after sustaining very heavy casualties from entrenched Syrian snipers strategically positioned on the mountain. An attack two weeks before had cost 25 dead and 67 wounded, while this second attack cost an additional 55 dead and 79 wounded.66 An Israeli D9 bulldozer with Israeli infantry breached a way to the peak, preventing the peak from falling into Syrian hands after the war. A paratrooper brigade took the corresponding Syrian outposts on the mountain.
At sea
Diagram of the Battle of Latakia
Naval engagements in Yom Kippur War saw the first naval battles between missile boats using surface-to-surface missiles. The Battle of Latakia, a revolutionary naval battle between the Syrians and the Israelis, took place on October 7, the second day of the war, resulting in a resounding Israeli victory that proved the potency of small, fast missile boats equipped with advanced ECM packages. This battle was the world's first battle between missile boats equipped with surface-to-surface missiles. The battle also established the Israeli Navy, long derided as the &quot;black sheep&quot; of the Israeli services, as a formidable and effective force in its own right. Following this and other smaller naval battles, the Syrian Navy stayed at their Mediterranean Sea ports throughout most of the war, enabling the Mediterranean sea lanes to Israel to remain partially open. The second naval battle which ended in a decisive Israeli victory was the Battle of Baltim in which the Israelis, with the use of electronic countermeasures, evaded the Egyptian missiles, and sunk three Egyptian vessels, before finally returning to port.6768697071 The Battle of Latakia and the Battle of Baltim drastically changed the operational situation at sea to Israeli advantage.72
According to Israeli and Western sources, the Israelis lost no vessels in the war.73747576 In the course of the naval battles Israeli vessels were targeted by as many as 52 Soviet-made anti-ship missiles, yet no one hit its target.77 According to historian Benny Morris, the Egyptians lost seven missile boats and four torpedo boats and coastal defense craft, while the Syrians lost five missile boats, one minesweeper, and one coastal defense vessel.78 All together, the Israeli Navy suffered three casualties: two Shayetet 13 frogmen, part of a team that penetrated Port Said with the purpose of hitting Egyptian naval targets, and one Dabur Patrol Boat crewman, killed during the Battle of Mersa Talemet, in the Gulf of Suez.79
Even though most western military historians agree that the Israeli Navy decisively won all naval engagements, one Egyptian historian, Hassan El Badri, claims that the Egyptian Navy had some success, and that on October 8 it managed to sink four Israeli vessels.80 Badri is the only one to report such an engagement.81
Participation by other states
Aid to Egypt and Syria
Starting on October 9, the Soviet Union began supplying Egypt and Syria by air and by sea. The Soviets airlifted 15,000 tons of supplies, of which more than half the supplies, and nearly all the tanks, went to Syria. and supplied another 63,000 tons mainly to Syria by means of a sealift,8283 However it was difficult for Egypt and Syria to choose which supplies were to be delivered often resulting in important supplies not being where they were most needed.848586
Besides Egypt, Syria, Jordan, and Iraq, several other Arab states were involved in this war, providing additional weapons and financing. Algeria sent 1 squadron of Mig-21s, and a squadron of Su-7s to Egypt, both of which arrived to the front between October 9 and October 11. It also sent an armored brigade, the advance elements of which began to arrive on October 17. Libyan forces were stationed in Egypt before the outbreak of the war. Libya provided one armored brigade and two squadrons of Mirage III fighters, of which one squadron was to be piloted by the Egyptian Air Force, and the other by Libyan pilots. Morocco sent one infantry brigade to Egypt, and one tank regiment to Syria. 8788An infantry brigade comprised of Palestinians was in Egypt before the outbreak of the war.8990 Saudi Arabia and Kuwait gave financial aid and sent some token forces to join in the battle.91 Pakistan sent sixteen pilots and an ambulance unit to Egypt and another to Syria. Bangladesh sent a medical team and relief supplies.
In addition to its forces in Syria, Iraq sent a single Hawker Hunter squadron to Egypt. The squadron quickly gained a reputation amongst Egyptian field commanders for its skill in air support, and particularly in anti-armor strikes.92
The Algerian armored brigade of nearly 200 tanks arrived on the front on October 24, and hence did not participate in the fighting. The Sudanese brigade also made a late appearance, arriving on October 28, again too late to participate in the war. Nearly all Arab reinforcements came with no logistical plan or support, expecting their hosts to supply them, and in several cases causing logistical problems. In the Syrian front, a lack of coordination between Arab forces led to several instances of friendly fire.9394
After the war, during the first days of November, Algeria deposited around 200 million dollars with the Soviet Union to finance arms purchases for both Egypt and Syria.95
Uganda radio reported that Idi Amin sent Ugandan soldiers to fight against Israel. Cuba also sent approximately 1,500 troops including tank and helicopter crews who reportedly also engaged in combat operations against the IDF.96
Aid to Israel
On commencement of hostilities, American leaders expected the tide of the war to quickly shift in favor of the better-equipped IDF and that Arab armies would be completely defeated within 72 to 96 hours. 97 American supplies to Israel until then had consisted of ammunition, particularly AT and AA ammunition.98 It became clear however on October 9 that no such quick reversal would occur, and that IDF losses were unexpectedly high.99
On that same day, President Nixon ordered the commencement of Operation Nickel Grass, an American airlift to replace all of Israel's material losses.100 Israel began receiving supplies on October 13, although, some equipment, such as the TOW missiles had arrived before October 11. According to Abraham Rabinovich, &quot;while the American airlift of supplies did not immediately replace Israel's losses in equipment, it did allow Israel to expend what it did have more freely&quot;.101 By the end of Nickel Grass, the United States had shipped 22,395 tons of mat&lt;U+00E9&gt;riel to Israel. The Israeli National Airline El Al took part in the airlift and flew 5,500 tons of materiel. Among the supplies sent to Israel were state of the art equipment, such as the AGM-65 Maverick missile and the BGM-71 TOW, which had only entered production three years prior, as well as highly advanced electronic jamming equipment, along with US Army instructors to rapidly train IDF forces in the use of these weapons.102103
The United States also conducted its own seaborne supply operation, delivering 33,210 tons to Israel by October 30.104
Egyptian commanders note that on October 13 and on October 15, air defense radars had detected an aircraft with an altitude of 25,000 meters and a speed of Mach 3, making it impossible to intercept the plane either by fighter or SAM missiles. The aircraft proceeded to cross the whole of the canal zone, the naval ports of the Red Sea (Hurghada and Safaga), flew over the airbases and air defenses in the Nile delta and finally disappeared from the radar screens over the Mediterranean Sea. The speed and altitude were those of the US SR-71 Blackbird, a long range strategic reconnaissance aircraft. According to Egyptian commanders, the intelligence provided by both reconnaissance flights helped the Israelis prepare for the Egyptian attack on October 14, and assisted it in conducting Operation Stouthearted Men.105106
Weapons
The Arab armies were equipped with predominantly Soviet-made weapons while Israel's armaments were mostly Western-made. The Arab armies' T-54/55s and T-62s were equipped with night vision equipment, which the Israeli tanks lacked, giving them an added advantage on the battlefield during the fighting that took place at night, while western tanks used by Israel had better armor, and/or better armament.
Type
Arab armies
IDF
Tanks
Egypt, Syria and Iraq used T-34/85, T-54, T-55, T-62 and PT-76, as well as SU-100/152 WWII vintage self propelled guns.
M50 Sherman, M51 Sherman, M48 Patton, M60 Patton, Centurion and about 200 T-54/55 captured during the Six-Day War, and later upgraded with British 105 mm L7 gun.
APCs/IFVs
BTR-40, BTR-152, BTR-50, BTR-60 APC's &amp; BMP 1 IFV's
M2/M3 Half-track, M113
Artillery
2A18, M1937 Howitzer, BM-21
M109 self-propelled howitzer, M107 Self-Propelled Gun, M110 self-propelled howitzer, M50 self-propelled howitzer and Makmat 160 mm self-propelled mortar, Obusier de 155 mm Mod&lt;U+00E8&gt;le 50 and Soltam M-68
Aircraft
MiG-21, MiG-19, MiG-17, Su-7B, Tu-16, Il-28, Il-18, Il-14, An-12, Aero L-29
A-4 Skyhawk, F-4 Phantom II, Dassault Mirage III, Dassault Myst&lt;U+00E8&gt;re IV, IAI Nesher, Sud Aviation Vautour
Helicopters
Mi-6, Mi-8
Super Frelon, CH-53, AB-205
AAW
SA-6 Gainful, SA-3 Goa, SA-2 Guideline, ZSU-23-4
MIM-23 Hawk, MIM-72/M48 Chaparral
Infantry weapons
Carl Gustav M/45, AK-47, RPK, RPD, DShK HMG, AT-3 Sagger and RPG-7
Uzi, FN FAL, M16, FN MAG, M2 Browning, Nord SS.11, LAW and TOW
The cease-fire and immediate aftermath
Egypt's trapped Third Army
When the cease fire came into effect, Israel had lost territory on the east side of the Suez Canal to Egypt (shown in red) but gained territory west of the canal and in the Golan Heights (shown in green).
The Security Council of the United Nations passed (14-0) Resolution 338 calling for a cease-fire, largely negotiated between the U.S. and Soviet Union, on October 22. It called upon &quot;all parties to the present fighting&quot; to &quot;terminate all military activity immediately.&quot; It came into effect 12 hours later at 6:52 p.m. Israeli time.107 Because it went into effect after darkness, it was impossible for satellite surveillance to determine where the front lines were when the fighting was supposed to stop.108 Prior to the ceasefire taking effect, U.S. Secretary of State Henry Kissinger had told Israeli Prime Minister Golda Meir, &quot;You won't get violent protests from Washington if something happens during the night, while I'm flying. Nothing can happen in Washington until noon tomorrow.&quot;109
When the cease-fire began, the Israeli forces were just a few hundred meters short of their goal—the last road linking Cairo and Suez, and Sharon's division had failed in repeated attempts to capture Ismailia and cut off the Second Army's supply lines.110 Adan's drive south had left Israeli and Egyptian units scattered throughout the battlefield, with no clear lines between them. Egyptian and Israeli units tried to regroup, and regular firefights broke out as both sides violated the ceasefire. During the night, nine Israeli tanks had been destroyed in various locations.111 It is unclear which side fired first,112 but Israeli field commanders, frustrated because they had been unable to seize the Cairo-Suez road, used the skirmishes as an excuse to resume the drive south. Adan decided to continue his attack on the October 23.113114 David Elazar requested permission to resume the offensive, and Moshe Dayan approved. In clear violation of the ceasefire, Israeli troops finished the drive south, captured the road, and trapped the Egyptian Third Army east of the Suez Canal. The Israelis pushed enormous amounts of equipment across the canal.115 When Sadat protested Israeli truce violations, Israel claimed that Egyptian troops had fired first. Israeli armor and paratroopers entered Suez in Suez in an attempt to capture the town, but they were ambushed by Third Army troops and surrounded. In the ensuing battle, the Israeli paratroopers managed to escape the town, albeit at high losses for no tactical gain.116117
The next morning, October 23, a flurry of diplomatic activity occurred. Soviet reconnaissance flights had confirmed that Israeli forces were moving south, and the Soviets accused the Israelis of treachery. In a phone call with Golda Meir, Henry Kissinger asked, &quot;How can anyone ever know where a line is or was in the desert?&quot; Meir responded, &quot;They'll know, all right.&quot; Kissinger found out about the trapped Egyptian army shortly thereafter.118
Kissinger realized the situation presented the United States with a tremendous opportunity—Egypt was totally dependent on the United States to prevent Israel from destroying its trapped army, which now had no access to food or water. The position could be parlayed later into allowing the United States to mediate the dispute, and push Egypt out of Soviet influence.
As a result, the United States exerted tremendous pressure on the Israelis to refrain from destroying the trapped army, even threatening to support a UN resolution to force the Israelis to pull back to their October 22 positions if they did not allow non-military supplies to reach the army. In a phone call with Israeli ambassador Simcha Dinitz, Kissinger told the ambassador that the destruction of the Egyptian Third Army &quot;is an option that does not exist.&quot;119 Depite being surrounded however, the Third Army managed to maintain its combat integrity east of the canal and keep up its defensive positions.120
Nuclear alert
In the meantime, Brezhnev sent Nixon a letter in the middle of the night of October 23–24. In that letter, Brezhnev proposed that American and Soviet contingents be dispatched to ensure both sides honor the cease-fire. He also threatened that &quot;I will say it straight that if you find it impossible to act jointly with us in this matter, we should be faced with the necessity urgently to consider taking appropriate steps unilaterally. We cannot allow arbitrariness on the part of Israel.&quot;121 In short, the Soviets were threatening to intervene in the war on Egypt's side.
The Soviets placed seven airborne divisions on alert and airlift was marshalled to transport them to the Middle East. An airborne command post was set up in the southern Soviet Union. Several air force units were also alerted. &quot;Reports also indicated that at least one of the divisions and a squadron of transport planes had been moved from the Soviet Union to an airbase in Yugoslavia&quot;.122 The Soviets also deployed seven amphibious warfare craft with some 40,000 naval infantry in the Mediterranean.
The message arrived after Nixon had gone to bed. Kissinger immediately called a meeting of senior officials, including Defense Secretary James Schlesinger, CIA Director William Colby, and White House Chief of Staff Alexander Haig. The Watergate scandal had reached its apex, and Nixon was so agitated and discomposed that they decided to handle the matter without him:
When Kissinger asked Haig whether [Nixon] should be wakened, the White House chief of staff replied firmly 'No.' Haig clearly shared Kissinger's feelings that Nixon was in no shape to make weighty decisions.123
The meeting produced a conciliatory response, which was sent (in Nixon's name) to Brezhnev. At the same time, it was decided to increase the Defense Condition (DEFCON) from four to three. Lastly, they approved a message to Sadat (again, in Nixon's name) asking him to drop his request for Soviet assistance, and threatening that if the Soviets were to intervene, so would the United States.124
The Soviets quickly detected the increased American defense condition, and were astonished and bewildered at the response. &quot;Who could have imagined the Americans would be so easily frightened,&quot; said Nikolai Podgorny. &quot;It is not reasonable to become engaged in a war with the United States because of Egypt and Syria,&quot; said Premier Alexei Kosygin, while KGB chief Yuri Andropov added that &quot;We shall not unleash the Third World War.&quot;125 In the end, the Soviets reconciled themselves to an Arab defeat. The letter from the American cabinet arrived during the meeting. Brezhnev decided that the Americans were too nervous, and that the best course of action would be to wait to reply.126 The next morning, the Egyptians agreed to the American suggestion, and dropped their request for assistance from the Soviets, bringing the crisis to an end.
Northern front de-escalation
On the northern front, a large air battle took place on October 23 near Damascus involving around sixty Israeli aircraft. Both the Syrian and Israeli air forces lost around ten aircraft.127 The Syrians had been preparing for a massive counter-attack, scheduled for October 23. In addition to Syria's five divisions, Iraq had supplied two, and there were smaller complements of troops from other Arab countries, including Jordan. The Soviets had replaced most of the losses Syria's tank forces had suffered during the first weeks of the war.
However, the day before the offensive was to begin, the United Nations imposed its cease-fire (following the acquiescence of both Israel and Egypt). Abraham Rabinovich states &quot;The acceptance by Egypt of the cease-fire on Monday [October 22] created a major dilemma for Assad. The cease-fire did not bind him, but its implications could not be ignored. Some on the Syrian General Staff favored going ahead with the attack, arguing that if it did so Egypt would feel obliged to continue fighting as well&lt;U+2026&gt; Others, however, argued that continuation of the war would legitimize Israel's efforts to destroy the Egyptian Third Army. In that case, Egypt would not come to Syria's assistance when Israel turned its full might northward, destroying Syria's infrastructure and perhaps attacking Damascus&quot;128
Ultimately, Assad decided to call off the offensive, and on October 23, Syria announced it had accepted the cease-fire, and the Iraqi government ordered its forces home.
Post-cease-fire negotiations
On October 24, the UNSC passed Resolution 339, serving as a renewed call for all parties to adhere to the cease fire terms established in Resolution 338. Organized fighting on all fronts ended by October 26. Several airstrikes took place against Third Army throughout October 25 to 28129130. The cease-fire did not end the sporadic clashes along the cease-fire lines, nor did it dissipate military tensions.
Israel received Kissinger's threat to support a UN withdrawal resolution, but before they could respond, Egyptian national security advisor Hafez Ismail sent Kissinger a stunning message—Egypt was willing to enter into direct talks with the Israelis, provided that the Israelis agree to allow nonmilitary supplies to reach their army and agree to a complete cease-fire.
The talks took place on October 28, between Israeli Major General Aharon Yariv and Egyptian Major General Abdel Ghani el-Gamasy. Ultimately, Kissinger brought the proposal to Sadat, who agreed almost without debate. United Nations checkpoints were brought in to replace Israeli checkpoints, nonmilitary supplies were allowed to pass, and prisoners-of-war were to be exchanged. A summit in Geneva followed, and ultimately, an armistice agreement was worked out. On January 18, Israel signed a pullback agreement to the east side of the canal, and the last of their troops withdrew from the west side of the canal on March 5, 1974.131Between the UN ceasefire and the armstice agreement in January, a minor war of attrition took place against Israeli forces west of the canal, during which 187 Israeli soldiers were killed, 41 tanks were destroyed, and 11 planes were downed.132133
On the Syrian front, shuttle diplomacy by Henry Kissinger eventually produced a disengagement agreement on May 31, 1974, based on exchange of prisoners-of-war, Israeli withdrawal to the Purple Line and the establishment of a UN buffer zone. Israel accused Syria of torturing its prisoners of war, claiming a violation of the Geneva conventions.134 The agreement ended the skirmishes and exchanges of artillery fire that had occurred frequently along the Israeli-Syrian cease-fire line. The UN Disengagement and Observer Force (UNDOF) was established as a peacekeeping force in the Golan.
Long-term effects of the war
The peace discussion at the end of the war was the first time that Arab and Israeli officials met for direct public discussions since the aftermath of the 1948 war.
The war could best be described as a stalemate.135136 On a tactical level, its end saw Israel with territorial gains in the Golan Heights and the encirclement of the Egyptian third army. Some believe the cease fire prevented Israel from landing its harshest blow, as a USMC report asserts:
They were now in position to threaten the rear administrative and supply areas of the entire Egyptian Army. Largely due to the efforts of the Soviet Union, which was fearful of the possibility of a serious Egyptian defeat, the U.N. Security Council imposed a cease-fire effective 22 October.137
The report also argues that the Arab side succeeded in surprising Israeli and worldwide intelligence agencies both strategically and tactically:
From a purely military point of view, the first and most important Arab success was the strategic and tactical surprise achieved. While this was aided to no small degree by mistakes made by Israeli Intelligence and the political and military leadership in Israel, the bulk of the credit must go to the highly sophisticated deception plan mounted by the Egyptians. They succeeded in convincing the Israeli Command that the intensive military activity to the west of the Canal during the summer and autumn of 1973 was nothing more than a series of training operations and maneuvers. This deception must be marked as one of the outstanding plans of deception mounted in the course of military history. The plan was successful not only as far as Israeli intelligence was concerned, but also with world-wide intelligence agencies.
For the Arab states (and Egypt in particular), the psychological trauma of their defeat in the Six-Day War had been healed. In many ways, it allowed them to negotiate with the Israelis as equals. However, given that the war had started about as well as the Arab leaders could have wanted, at the end they had made only limited territorial gains in the Sinai front, while Israel gained more territory on the Golan Heights than it held before the war; also given the fact that Israel managed to gain a foothold on African soil west of the canal, the war helped convince many in the Arab World that Israel could not be defeated militarily, thereby strengthening peace movements. The war effectively ended the old Arab ambition of destroying Israel by force.138
The war had a stunning effect on the population in Israel. Following their victory in the Six-Day War, the Israeli military had become complacent. The shock and sudden defeats that occurred at the beginning of the war sent a terrible psychological blow to the Israelis, who had thought they had military supremacy in the region.139 However, in time, they began to realize what an astounding, almost unprecedented, turnaround they had achieved:
Reeling from a surprise attack on two fronts with the bulk of its army still unmobilized, and confronted by staggering new battlefield realities, Israel's situation was one that could readily bring strong nations to their knees. Yet, within days, it had regained its footing and in less than two weeks it was threatening both enemy capitals, an achievement having few historical parallels.
In Israel, however, the casualty rate was high. Per capita, Israel suffered three times as many casualties in 3 weeks of fighting as the United States did during almost a decade of fighting in Vietnam.140 The 1973 war produced unprecedented numbers of soldiers suffering from combat shock and other psychiatric problems. The ratio of psychiatric cases was as high as 23.1 percent of all non fatal cases. The IDF was unprepared to deal with such cases because, in all previous wars (with the exception of the 1948 war), the Israelis often achieved quick victory with low casualty rates. The Yom Kippur War however, was noted for its lethality and intense, prolonged fighting, creating such high incidents of combat shock. Ariel Sharon, a flamboyant general, pointed out to this reality: &quot;I have been fighting for 25 years, and all the rest were just battles. This was a real war.&quot;141
In response to U.S. support of Israel, the Arab members of OPEC, led by Saudi Arabia, decided to reduce oil production by 5% per month on October 17. On October 19, President Nixon authorized a major allocation of arms supplies and $2.2 billion in appropriations for Israel. In response, Saudi Arabia declared an embargo against the United States, later joined by other oil exporters and extended against the Netherlands and other states, causing the 1973 energy crisis.142
The initial success greatly increased Sadat's popularity, giving him much firmer control of the Egyptian state and the opportunity to initiate many of the reforms he felt were necessary. In later years this would fade, and the destructive 1977 anti-government food riot in Cairo had the slogan &quot;Hero of the crossing, where is our breakfast?&quot; (&quot;&lt;U+064A&gt;&lt;U+0627&gt; &lt;U+0628&gt;&lt;U+0637&gt;&lt;U+0644&gt; &lt;U+0627&gt;&lt;U+0644&gt;&lt;U+0639&gt;&lt;U+0628&gt;&lt;U+0648&gt;&lt;U+0631&gt;&lt;U+060C&gt; &lt;U+0641&gt;&lt;U+064A&gt;&lt;U+0646&gt; &lt;U+0627&gt;&lt;U+0644&gt;&lt;U+0641&gt;&lt;U+0637&gt;&lt;U+0648&gt;&lt;U+0631&gt;&lt;U+061F&gt;&quot;, &quot;Y&lt;U+0101&gt; batl al-`ab&lt;U+016B&gt;r, f&lt;U+0113&gt;n al-fut&lt;U+016B&gt;r?&quot;).
Fallout in Israel
A protest against the Israeli government started four months after the war ended. It was led by Motti Ashkenazi, commander of Budapest, the northernmost of the Bar-Lev forts and the only one during the war not to be captured by the Egyptians.143 Anger against the Israeli government (and Dayan in particular) was high. Shimon Agranat, President of the Israeli Supreme Court, was asked to lead an inquiry, the Agranat Commission, into the events leading up to the war and the setbacks of the first few days.144
The Agranat Commission published its preliminary findings on April 2, 1974. Six people were held particularly responsible for Israel's failings:
IDF Chief of Staff David Elazar was recommended for dismissal, after the Commission found he bore &quot;personal responsibility for the assessment of the situation and the preparedness of the IDF.&quot;
Intelligence Chief, Aluf Eli Zeira, and his deputy, head of Research, Brigadier-General Aryeh Shalev, were recommended for dismissal.
Lt. Colonel Bandman, head of the Aman desk for Egypt, and Lt. Colonel Gedelia, chief of intelligence for the Southern Command, were recommended for transfer away from intelligence duties.
Shmuel Gonen, commander of the Southern front, was recommended by the initial report to be relieved of active duty.145 He was forced to leave the army after the publication of the Commission's final report, on January 30, 1975, which found that &quot;he failed to fulfill his duties adequately, and bears much of the responsibility for the dangerous situation in which our troops were caught.&quot;146
Rather than quieting public discontent, the report—which &quot;had stressed that it was judging the ministers' responsibility for security failings, not their parliamentary responsibility, which fell outside its mandate&quot;—inflamed it. Although it had cleared Meir and Dayan of all responsibility, public calls for their resignation (especially Dayan's) became more vociferous.147
Finally, on April 11, 1974, Golda Meir resigned. Her cabinet followed suit, including Dayan, who had previously offered to resign twice and was turned down both times by Meir. Yitzhak Rabin, who had spent most of the war as an advisor to Elazar in an unofficial capacity,148 became head of the new Government, which was seated in June.
In 1999, the issue was revisited by the Israeli political leadership to prevent similar shortcomings from being repeated. The Israeli National Security Council was created to improve coordination between the different security and intelligence bodies, and the political branch of government.
Camp David Accords
Rabin's government was hamstrung by a pair of scandals, and he was forced to step down in 1977. The right-wing Likud party, under the prime ministership of Menachem Begin, won the elections that followed. This marked a historic change in the Israeli political landscape as for the first time since Israel's founding, a coalition not led by the Labour party was in control of the government.
Sadat, who had entered the war in order to recover the Sinai from Israel, grew frustrated at the slow pace of the peace process. In a 1977 interview with CBS News' Walter Cronkite, Sadat admitted under pointed questioning that he was open to a more constructive dialog for peace, including a state visit. This seemed to open the floodgates, as in a later interview with the same reporter, the normally hard-line Begin - perhaps not wishing to be compared unfavorably to Sadat - said he too would be amenable to better relations and offered his invitation for such a visit. Thus in November of that year, Sadat took the unprecedented step of visiting Israel, becoming the first Arab leader to do so, and so implicitly recognized Israel.
The act jump-started the peace process. United States President Jimmy Carter invited both Sadat and Begin to a summit at Camp David to negotiate a final peace. The talks took place from September 5–17, 1978. Ultimately, the talks succeeded, and Israel and Egypt signed the Israel-Egypt Peace Treaty in 1979. Israel withdrew its troops and settlers from the Sinai, in exchange for normal relations with Egypt and a lasting peace.
Many in the Arab community were outraged at Egypt's peace with Israel. Egypt was expelled from the Arab League. Until then, Egypt had been &quot;at the helm of the Arab world.&quot;149 Egypt's tensions with its Arab neighbors culminated in 1977 in the short-lived Libyan&lt;U+2013&gt;Egyptian War.
Anwar Sadat was assassinated two years later, on October 6, 1981, while attending a parade marking the eighth anniversary of the start of the war, by Islamist army members who were outraged at his negotiations with Israel.
Commemorations
October 6 is a national holiday in Egypt called Armed Forces Day. It is a national holiday in Syria as well.150
In Egypt, many places were proudly named after the October 6 date and Ramadan 10, its equivalent in the Islamic calendar. Examples of these commemorations are the 6th October Bridge in Cairo and the cities 6th of October City and 10th of Ramadan City.
References
Notes
Bibliography
(in Hebrew)
Quandt, William B. Soviet Policy in the October 1973 War. Rand Corp. R-1864-ISA, May 1976.
Israel Ministry of Foreign Affairs&lt;U+2014&gt;The Jarring initiative and the response
Jerusalem Post's&lt;U+2014&gt;Yom Kippur War: Shattered Heights
Jewish Agency for Israel's Timeline of Israeli history
Jewish Education Dept., JAFI, Israeli Intelligence and the Yom Kippur War of 1973
Put an end to Israeli aggression, an article printed in the Pravda newspaper on October 12, 1973 (translation at CNN)
External links
A detailed account of 1973 October War (Yom Kippur War) - From Ariel Sharon's Biography
The October War national park, Cairo
The Bitter Blow - Israeli-Arab Relations after the wars
Maps: Egypt
Maps: Syria
The October War, Al Ahram supplement
The October War and US Policy&lt;U+2014&gt;Provided by the National Security Archive.
Lessons of the October War, Ahmad Faruqui
A Cry From The Bunkers&lt;U+2014&gt;Dramatic and authentic recordings by IDF soldier Avi Yaffe from inside the IDF position, under attack at the outbreak of the war.
The reasons of the war.&lt;U+2014&gt;Provided by Major Ebrahim Al-Jowder Bahrain Armed Forces.
The 1973 October War: The Egyptian Perspective&lt;U+2014&gt;Provided By Major J.C. Moulton, United States Air Force.
The 1973 Arab-Israeli War: Arab Policies, Strategies, and Campaigns&lt;U+2014&gt; Provided by Major Michael C. Jordan, United States Marine Corps.
Operation Valiant: Turning of the Tide in the Sinai 1973 Arab-Israeli War - by Major Richard L. Owen, US Marine Corps Command and Staff College.
Kissinger's Yom Kippur oil shock - Reasons for outbreak of war according to F.William Engdahl.
Yom Kippur War: Sacrificial Stand in the Golan Heights - by Gary Rashba, Military History Magainze, October 1998 issue.
Fundamental surprise, by Dr. Zvi Lanir, Tel Aviv University
Radio program - 6:36 min from radio program about the Yom Kippur war. The program includes authentic recordings of the first moments of the war.
&quot;Another Round in the War of Words&quot; Time Monday, Oct. 29, 1973. Separate interviews (same questions) with the Israeli Foreign Minister and Egyptian Foreign Minister.
ar:&lt;U+062D&gt;&lt;U+0631&gt;&lt;U+0628&gt; &lt;U+0623&gt;&lt;U+0643&gt;&lt;U+062A&gt;&lt;U+0648&gt;&lt;U+0628&gt;&lt;U+0631&gt; bs:Jom Kipurski rat bg:&lt;U+0412&gt;&lt;U+043E&gt;&lt;U+0439&gt;&lt;U+043D&gt;&lt;U+0430&gt; &lt;U+043E&gt;&lt;U+0442&gt; &lt;U+0419&gt;&lt;U+043E&gt;&lt;U+043C&gt; &lt;U+041A&gt;&lt;U+0438&gt;&lt;U+043F&gt;&lt;U+0443&gt;&lt;U+0440&gt; ca:Guerra del Iom Kippur cs:Jomkipursk&lt;U+00E1&gt; v&lt;U+00E1&gt;lka cy:Rhyfel Yom Kippur da:Yom Kippur-krigen de:Jom-Kippur-Krieg el:&lt;U+03A0&gt;&lt;U+03CC&gt;&lt;U+03BB&gt;&lt;U+03B5&gt;&lt;U+03BC&gt;&lt;U+03BF&gt;&lt;U+03C2&gt; &lt;U+03C4&gt;&lt;U+03BF&gt;&lt;U+03C5&gt; &lt;U+0393&gt;&lt;U+03B9&gt;&lt;U+03BF&gt;&lt;U+03BC&gt; &lt;U+039A&gt;&lt;U+03B9&gt;&lt;U+03C0&gt;&lt;U+03C0&gt;&lt;U+03BF&gt;&lt;U+03CD&gt;&lt;U+03C1&gt; es:Guerra de Yom Kipur eo:Milito de Jom Kippur eu:Yom Kippur Gerra fa:&lt;U+062C&gt;&lt;U+0646&gt;&lt;U+06AF&gt; &lt;U+06CC&gt;&lt;U+0648&gt;&lt;U+0645&gt; &lt;U+06A9&gt;&lt;U+06CC&gt;&lt;U+067E&gt;&lt;U+0648&gt;&lt;U+0631&gt; fr:Guerre du Kippour gl:Guerra do Yom Kippur ko:&lt;U+C6A4&gt;&lt;U+D0A4&gt;&lt;U+D478&gt;&lt;U+B974&gt; &lt;U+C804&gt;&lt;U+C7C1&gt; hr:Jomkipurski rat id:Perang Yom Kippur is:Jom kipp&lt;U+00FA&gt;r-str&lt;U+00ED&gt;&lt;U+00F0&gt;i&lt;U+00F0&gt; it:Guerra del Kippur he:&lt;U+05DE&gt;&lt;U+05DC&gt;&lt;U+05D7&gt;&lt;U+05DE&gt;&lt;U+05EA&gt; &lt;U+05D9&gt;&lt;U+05D5&gt;&lt;U+05DD&gt; &lt;U+05D4&gt;&lt;U+05DB&gt;&lt;U+05D9&gt;&lt;U+05E4&gt;&lt;U+05D5&gt;&lt;U+05E8&gt;&lt;U+05D9&gt;&lt;U+05DD&gt; jv:Perang Yom Kippur ka:&lt;U+10D8&gt;&lt;U+10DD&gt;&lt;U+10DB&gt;-&lt;U+10E5&gt;&lt;U+10D8&gt;&lt;U+10E4&gt;&lt;U+10E3&gt;&lt;U+10E0&gt;&lt;U+10D8&gt;&lt;U+10E1&gt; &lt;U+10DD&gt;&lt;U+10DB&gt;&lt;U+10D8&gt; lt:Teismo dienos karas hu:Jom kippuri h&lt;U+00E1&gt;bor&lt;U+00FA&gt; mk:&lt;U+0412&gt;&lt;U+043E&gt;&lt;U+0458&gt;&lt;U+043D&gt;&lt;U+0430&gt;&lt;U+0442&gt;&lt;U+0430&gt; &lt;U+043E&gt;&lt;U+0434&gt; &lt;U+0408&gt;&lt;U+043E&gt;&lt;U+043C&gt; &lt;U+041A&gt;&lt;U+0438&gt;&lt;U+043F&gt;&lt;U+0443&gt;&lt;U+0440&gt;&lt;U+0441&gt;&lt;U+043A&gt;&lt;U+0438&gt; arz:&lt;U+062D&gt;&lt;U+0631&gt;&lt;U+0628&gt; &lt;U+0627&gt;&lt;U+0643&gt;&lt;U+062A&gt;&lt;U+0648&gt;&lt;U+0628&gt;&lt;U+0631&gt; ms:Perang Yom Kippur nl:Jom Kipoeroorlog ja:&lt;U+7B2C&gt;&lt;U+56DB&gt;&lt;U+6B21&gt;&lt;U+4E2D&gt;&lt;U+6771&gt;&lt;U+6226&gt;&lt;U+4E89&gt; no:Yom Kippur-krigen nn:Jom kipp&lt;U+00FA&gt;rkrigen pl:Wojna Jom Kippur pt:Guerra do Yom Kipur ro:R&lt;U+0103&gt;zboiul de Yom Kippur ru:&lt;U+0412&gt;&lt;U+043E&gt;&lt;U+0439&gt;&lt;U+043D&gt;&lt;U+0430&gt; &lt;U+0421&gt;&lt;U+0443&gt;&lt;U+0434&gt;&lt;U+043D&gt;&lt;U+043E&gt;&lt;U+0433&gt;&lt;U+043E&gt; &lt;U+0434&gt;&lt;U+043D&gt;&lt;U+044F&gt; simple:Yom Kippur War sk:Jomkipursk&lt;U+00E1&gt; vojna sl:Jomkipurska vojna sr:&lt;U+0408&gt;&lt;U+043E&gt;&lt;U+043C&gt; &lt;U+041A&gt;&lt;U+0438&gt;&lt;U+043F&gt;&lt;U+0443&gt;&lt;U+0440&gt;&lt;U+0441&gt;&lt;U+043A&gt;&lt;U+0438&gt; &lt;U+0440&gt;&lt;U+0430&gt;&lt;U+0442&gt; fi:Jom kippur -sota sv:Oktoberkriget vi:Chi&lt;U+1EBF&gt;n tranh Yom Kippur tr:Yom Kippur Sava&lt;U+015F&gt;&lt;U+0131&gt; ur:&lt;U+062C&gt;&lt;U+0646&gt;&lt;U+06AF&gt; &lt;U+06CC&gt;&lt;U+0648&gt;&lt;U+0645&gt; &lt;U+06A9&gt;&lt;U+067E&gt;&lt;U+0648&gt;&lt;U+0631&gt; yi:&lt;U+05D9&gt;&lt;U+05D5&gt;&lt;U+05DD&gt; &lt;U+05DB&gt;&lt;U+05D9&gt;&lt;U+05E4&gt;&lt;U+05D5&gt;&lt;U+05E8&gt; &lt;U+05DE&gt;&lt;U+05DC&gt;&lt;U+05D7&gt;&lt;U+05DE&gt;&lt;U+05D4&gt; zh:&lt;U+8D16&gt;&lt;U+7F6A&gt;&lt;U+65E5&gt;&lt;U+6230&gt;&lt;U+722D&gt;
  Category:1973 in Egypt Category:Conflicts in 1973
During the Autumn of 2003, following the declassification of key Aman documents, the newspaper Yedioth Ahronoth released a series of controversial articles which revealed that key Israeli figures were aware of considerable danger that an attack was likely, including Golda Meir and Moshe Dayan, but had decided not to act. The two journalists leading the investigation, Ronen Bergman and Gil Meltzer, later went on to publish Yom Kippur War, Real Time: The Updated Edition, Yediot Ahronoth/Hemed Books, 2004. ISBN 965-511-597-6↩
Herzog, Chaim (1989) Heroes of Israel. Boston: Little, Brown. ISBN 0-316-35901-7 p.253↩
Shlaim, Avi (2001). The Iron Wall: Israel and the Arab World. W. W. Norton &amp; Company. ISBN 0-393-32112-6, p.254.↩
&quot;The Jarring initiative and the response,&quot; Israel's Foreign Relations, Selected Documents, vols. 1–2, 1947–1974 (accessed June 9, 2005).↩
Rabinovich, 13.↩
Heikal, 22↩
Rabinovich, 39.↩
Rabinovich, 25.↩
Jewish Press, Friday October 5, 2007; Spy or Double Agent?: Israel's October Surprise (cover story)↩
Shazly p.207↩
Dr. George W. Gawrych The 1973 Arab-Israeli War: The Albatross of Desicive Victory p.24↩
Rabinovich, 51.↩
Rabinovich, 50.↩
Rabinovich, 57.↩
Doron Geller, &quot;Israeli Intelligence and the Yom Kippur War of 1973,&quot; &quot;JUICE&quot;, The Department for Jewish Zionist Education, The Jewish Agency for Israel (accessed November 27, 2005).↩
Rabinovich, 89.↩
Sachar, Howard M. A History of Israel from the Rise of Zionism to Our Time. Alfred A. Knopf, 2007, p. 755.↩
Dr. George W. Gawrych The 1973 Arab-Israeli War: The Albatross of Decisive Victory, p.27↩
Shazly p.224-225↩
Shazly p.225-226↩
Shazly. page 46.↩
Shazly p.189↩
Shazly p.55-56↩
Shazly p.222↩
El-Gammasy, The October War, p.206↩
The Crossing of the Suez Canal, October 6, 1973 (The Ramadan War), page 9↩
Shazly p.228↩
Shazly p.229↩
Into the breach, dear friends, paragraph 10↩
Cohen, Israel's Best Defense, p.354↩
Saad El Shazli The Crossing of the Suez p. 233↩
Shazly p.223, 235↩
Saad El Shzly The Crossing of the Suez p.244↩
Bartov, Dado, p. 314, 332. Herzog, The Arab Israeli Wars, p.248, 250.↩
Into the breach, dear friends, paragraph 11↩
El Gamasy The October War, 1973 p. 235, 241↩
Rabinovich, 234↩
October 9, 1973 conversation (8:20-8:40 AM) between Israeli Ambassador to the United States Simcha Dinitz, military attach&lt;U+00E9&gt; General Mordechai Gur, Henry Kissinger, Brent Scowcroft, and Peter Rodman. Transcript George Washington University National Security Archive↩
Shazly p.240↩
Dr. George W. Gawrych The 1973 Arab-Israeli War: The Albatross of Decisive Victory, p.54-55↩
Dr. George W. Gawrych The 1973 Arab-Israeli War: The Albatross of Decisive Victory, p.55↩
Saad El Shazly The Crossing of the Suez p.248↩
Dr. George W. Gawrych The Albatross of Desicive Victory: The 1973 Arab-Israeli War p.56-57↩
Rabinovich, 355.↩
Dr. George W. Gawrych The 1973 Arab-Israeli War: The Albatross of Decisive Victory, p.60.↩
El Gammasy The October War, 1973 p.284, 287-288↩
Shazly p.259↩
Operation Valiant↩
Shazly p.264-265↩
Dr. George W. Gawrych The 1973 Arab-Israeli War: The Albatross of Decisive Victory, p.65-66↩
Donald Neff. 'Warrior Against Israel: How Israel won the battle to become America's ally 1973'. Amana Books, Vermont. 1988. DS128.12.N44. page 306. plus 994 artillery pieces↩
Peter Caddick-Adams &quot;Golan Heights, battles of&quot; The Oxford Companion to Military History. Ed. Richard Holmes. Oxford University Press, 2001.↩
&quot;Shattered Heights: Part 1,&quot; Jerusalem Post, September 25, 1998 (accessed June 9, 2005).↩
Rabinovich, 302↩
Rabinovich, 304↩
Rabinovich, 433↩
Rabinovich, 314↩
Rabinovich, 450↩
Simon Dunstan, The Yom Kippur War, p. 114↩
Robert Bolia, Overreliance on Technology: Yom Kippur Case Study↩
Abraham Rabonovich, The Boats of Cherbourg, pp. 256-262↩
Trevor N. Dupuy, Elusive Victory, pp. 562-563↩
Chaim Herzogm The Arab-Israeli Wars, p. 312↩
Milan N. Vego&lt;U+200F&gt;, Naval Strategy and Operations in Narrow Seas (Routledge: 1999), at p.151↩
Benny Morris, Righteous Victims, p. 432↩
Chaim Herzogm The Arab-Israeli Wars, p. 314↩
Massimo Annati, Anti-ship missiles and countermeasures--part I (ASM), Naval Forces (2001), Vol. 22, Iss. 1; pg. 20.↩
Ze'ev Almog, Israel's Navy beat the odds, United States Naval Institute - Proceedings (Mar 1997), Vol. 123, Iss. 3; pg. 106.↩
Hassan El-Badri The Ramadan War, 1973 p.164-165↩
In fact, the Journal of Military History (formerly Military Affairs) criticized Badri's book, in which his accounts are brought, as being totally biased in its approach, and should be avoided by anyone seeking a general history of the war. (Review: The Arab-Israeli War of Words: Recent Books Reviewed, Military Affairs, Vol. 45, No. 4 (Dec., 1981), pp. 200-202, at p.201). Another military historian called Badri's book a &quot;mere rhetoric&quot;. (Simon Dunstan, The Yom Kippur War: The Arab-Israeli War of 1973 (Osprey Publishing, 2007) at p.219).↩
Shazly p.274-275 Shazly states that ...the Soviet Union mounted a sea-borne resupply operation: no less than 63,000 tons, mainly to Syria, by October 30↩
Quandt, 25 (pdf page 37) gives the airlift total as approximately 12,500 tons; Quandt 23 (pdf page 35) gives the sealift total as approximately 63,000 tons.↩
A History of Israel, M. Sachar, Alfred Knopf, 1998, p.768↩
Rabinovich, 324↩
Shazly p.274-275↩
Shazly p.277-278↩
Rabinovich, 464↩
Shazly p.277-278↩
Shazly p.278↩
Shazly p.278↩
Cuba: Between Reform and Revolution, Louis Perez, pg 377&lt;U+2013&gt;379↩
October 6 conversation between Henry Kissinger, Brent Scowcroft and Chinese Ambassador to the United States Huan Chen. Transcript. George Washington University National Security Archive.↩
October 7 conversation between Henry Kissinger, Israeli Ambassador to the United States Sichma Dinitz and Military Attache General Mordechai Shalev. Transcript. George Washington University National Security Archive.↩
October 9, 1973 conversation (6:10-6:35 PM) between Israeli Ambassador to the United States Simcha Dinitz, Henry Kissinger, Brent Scocroft, and Peter Rodman. Transcript George Washington University National Security Archive↩
Rabinovich, 491.↩
Shazli p.275-276↩
Dr. George W. Gawrych The Albatross of Decisive Victory: The 1973 Arab-Israeli War p.56↩
Shazly p.276. Shazly states: ...the USA mounted a seaborne resupply operation of 33,210 tons by October 30.↩
El Gamasy The October War, 1973 p.276↩
Shazly p.251-252↩
Rabinovich, 452↩
Rabinovich, 458↩
22 October Memorandum of Conversation between Meir and Kissinger↩
Dr. George W. Gawrych The 1973 Arab-Israeli War: The Albatross of Decisive Victory, p.74↩
Rabinovich, 463↩
The October War and U.S. Policy, Collapse of the Ceasefire↩
The 1973 Arab Israeli war. Major Steven J. Piccirilli, USMC. Globalsecurity.org, 1989↩
Dr. George W. Gawrych The 1973 Arab-Israeli War: The Albatross of Decisive Victory, p.73↩
Rabinovich 466-475↩
Rabinovich, 465↩
Rabinovich, 487↩
Dr. George W. Gawrych The 1973 Arab-Israeli War: The Albatross of Decisive Victory, p.74↩
Rabinovich, 479↩
↩
Rabinovich, 480↩
Rabinovich, 484↩
Rabinovich, 485↩
Situation Report in the Middle East as of 1200 EDT, 10/23/73, Department of State Operations Center↩
Rabinovich, 464&lt;U+2013&gt;465↩
Shazly p.282↩
Trevor N. Dupuy Elusive Victory: The Arab-Israeli Wars, 1947-1974 p.542↩
Rabinovich, 493↩
El Gamasy The October War 1973 p.302↩
Dr. George W. Gawrych The Albatross of Decisive Victory: The 1973 Arab Israeli War p.76↩
Shimon Peres - Syria Grossly Violated Geneva Convention on treatment of Israeli prisoners of war Defence Minister Peres and the Knesset Resolution, June 12, 1974↩
Operation Valiant: Turning the Tide in the Sinai↩
The Middle East: a glossary of terms. Guardian Unlimited, May 15, 2001↩
Rabinovich, 497–498↩
Rabinovich, 498↩
Dr. George W. Gawrych The Albatross of Decisive Victory: The 1973 Arab Israeli War p.75-76↩
Charles D. Smith, Palestine and the Arab-Israeli Conflict, New York: Bedford, 2006, p. 329.↩
Rabinovich, 499↩
Rabinovich, 501↩
Rabinovich, 502↩
Findings of the Agranat Commission, The Jewish Agency for Israel, see &quot;January 30&quot; on linked page (accessed June 9, 2005).↩
Rabinovich, 237↩
Karsh, 86↩
Syria Country Commercial Guide FY 2004 (09/05/2003) Strategis.gc.ca. Accessed 2007-06-07.↩
