The 1846 Havana hurricane (; also known as the Great Havana Hurricane of 1846) was the most intense tropical cyclone in recorded history for 78 years and the first known Category 5-strength hurricane to strike Cuba. The first indications of the formation of a disturbance were first noted on 5 October in the Caribbean Sea, but little else was known until the storm approached Cuba on 10 October. There, it brought extreme winds and the lowest known atmospheric pressure of the time &lt;U+2013&gt; 938 mbar (27.70 inHg) &lt;U+2013&gt; a record which remained unbroken until the development of a later cyclone in 1924. It soon curved toward Florida, where it maintained its intensity, continuing to rapidly hasten northward along the East Coast of the United States to New England. It entered an extratropical transition while situated over New York on 13 October, producing intense Category 2-force winds and unusually little precipitation. Eventually, the gale dissipated over the Canadian Maritimes the following day as a markedly weaker storm.
Information on the hurricane's impact in Cuba is sparse due to a lack of existing historical records. The storm caused over a hundred deaths, capsized dozens of ships, obliterated buildings, uprooted trees, and ruined crops. Damage in the United States was considerably better-chronicled despite being less severe. In Key West, widespread destruction was noted, with 40 deaths and many vessels rendered unfit. Structural devastation was also significant, with high floodwaters lifting many buildings off of their foundations and strong gusts flattening hundreds of others. Few supplies arrived in the following days and relief efforts were gradual, with few resources within the town's vicinity. Along other sections of the southeastern coast, copious rainfall and moderate winds impacted agriculture, shipping, and residences. Several boats were rendered unusable, though damage was generally less severe than in Florida and Cuba. As it tracked along the Middle-Atlantic coast, similar effects were reported: there, the gale inundated many areas, impeded communications, destroyed railroads and canals, and flattened structures. Despite extensive damage, only two deaths were recorded outside of Cuba and Florida. Along its entire track, the hurricane caused $338,000 in losses and at least 164 deaths.{{#tag:ref|All damage figures are in 1846 United States dollars (USD).|group=&quot;nb&quot;}}{{#tag:ref|A concrete death total cannot be established due to the hurricane's historical nature; the figure used is one from a modern study,1 though unofficial sources indicate significantly higher totals.2|group=&quot;nb&quot;}}
Unusual in many aspects, the 1846 Havana hurricane was the most intense of its time. Though atmospheric pressure readings in Cuba reached as low as 916 mbar (27.06 inHg), the meteorological historian Jose Fernandez-Partag&lt;U+00E1&gt;s re-evaluated several possible pressure records, concluding that the cyclone's minimum pressure was likely closer to 938 mbar (27.70 inHg); even so, it maintained the title of having the lowest recorded pressure measurement until 1924, 78 years later. Although no reliable wind measurements were available at the time, a separate study also estimated that it produced Category 5-strength winds, making it the first known storm to strike Cuba at such an intensity. As a result of the tropical cyclone's extreme intensity, ecological and geographical features were permanently altered in many areas. Sand Key, which completely submerged during the course of the hurricane, wholly re-emerged by December of that year, albeit not in its original position; meanwhile, ecological damage remained evident for decades in Key West.
Meteorological history
The hurricane's origins can be traced to the central Caribbean Sea on 5 October.3 The following day, its passage south of Jamaica was observed,4 and soon later, the hurricane transited across the Cayman Islands, producing relatively high winds.5 During the late evening of 10 October, winds began to increase on the island of Cuba, culminating the following morning; while the strongest winds were originally in the storm's northeastern sector, they were later noted in its northwest. Its eye presumably passed slightly east of Havana while maintaining an atmospheric pressure of 916 mbar (27.06 inHg).6 This was accompanied by Category 5-force winds on the modern-day Saffir&lt;U+2013&gt;Simpson hurricane wind scale,7 defined as 1-minute maximum sustained winds of at least 157 mph (252 km/h). 8 Despite the reading, a 1993 analysis by weather historian Jose Fernandez-Partag&lt;U+00E1&gt;s calculated a corrected sea-level pressure at 938 mbar (27.70 inHg); even so, the value maintained the hurricane as the most intense in recorded history.9 It arrived at Key West the morning of 11 October, soon after its departure from Cuba, with undiminished intensity.10 The storm gradually meandered toward Tampa Bay, and eventually arrived on that afternoon of 11 October, its effects persisting through the following morning.11 Winds, which initially swept northeasterly at force 4 during the early evening, recurved toward the southeast and peaked at force 8 the following morning. Weather historian David Ludlum tracked the hurricane's path past Cedar Key, noting the disturbance's northeastward curve as it neared Jacksonville.12
Advancing northward, the once-powerful hurricane weakened, with somewhat higher atmospheric pressures and winds of less severity reported at Charleston, South Carolina. Paralleling the coast while situated inland, it hastened quickly toward the north, swiftly passing through North Carolina and arriving in the Chesapeake Bay region by 13 October.13 Southeasterly gusts persisted as the storm continued its northerly progression inland along the course of the East Coast of the United States. After reaching Washington, D.C. in the early morning, it arrived near New York City by sunrise, and transited across Boston during the afternoon of 13 October. The storm likely underwent an extratropical transition by the time it arrived in New York state, elongating linearly east-to-west.14 The gale's winds swept toward the southeast with a brief hiatus in the early evening. As it neared New England, it produced little precipitation yet incited intense gusts, peaking at force 9-strength in the vicinity of New Bedford, Massachusetts.15 The cyclone's diameter over New England, at its largest point, reached , accompanied Category 2-force winds.16 The system was last sighted on the morning of 14 October, rapidly weakening as it meandered into the Canadian Maritimes.17
Impact
Due to a lack of historical documentation, little is known about the hurricane's impact in Cuba aside from its severity: the storm destroyed nearly a hundred ships,18 inflicted severe damage to structures throughout Havana,19 and likely killed hundreds of individuals there.20 Damage in the United States, however, was better-documented. There, the disturbance washed away the island of Sand Key and resulted in the loss of many vessels in nearby Key West harbor.21 Its storm surge scattered debris throughout the city and swept many structures afloat upon high waters.22 In all, approximately $200,000 in damage and 40 deaths were reported,23 representing four percent of the town's population.24 Elsewhere in the state, damage remained severe, with abnormal storm tides and widespread property destruction noted.25 Shipping and agriculture took the brunt of the storm's impact in other southeastern states;26 there, it produced damage similar to that inflicted by an earlier 1824 hurricane.27 Even farther north along the Middle-Atlantic coast, copious rainfall and intense gusts were observed, especially in the New England region. Winds uprooted trees, cracked canals,28 damaged railroads, and demolished factories.29 Rainfall totals, however, were generally low, indicative of a dry gale.30 In all, the hurricane caused at least 164 deaths and $338,000 (1846 USD) in damage throughout its path,{{#tag:ref|Damage totals as follows: Fort Zachary Taylor endured $200,000 in damage at Key West,31 the $16,000 vessel Exchange was capsized, the $10,000 boat Commissary was sunk, the $45,000 ship Iris was grounded, the $22,000 craft Eben Preble was beached,32 the $5,000 vessel La Reunion was driven ashore, the $20,000 ship Villanueva was run aground, and the $20,000 boat Navigator was beached.33|group=&quot;nb&quot;}} although some reports indicated hundreds of additional deaths across the island of Cuba.34
Caribbean Sea
Early in its development, the hurricane passed near the Cayman Islands, inundating all of Grand Cayman, with its worth effects concentrated at the localities of Savannah and Newlands, both under a  storm surge.35 Although residential damage was minimal, many grasslands were destroyed.36 Damage in Cuba is mostly unknown; there, the hurricane capsized nearly all crafts docked at Havana Harbor, and of the 104 boats in the harbor prior to the storm's arrival, only 12 remained after it subsided. Between 40 and 50 other cargo vessels were impaired, with significant structural damage in the city proper also observed.37 Damage to houses, crops, and shipping was catastrophic throughout the island; the storm was reportedly the worst in Cuban history at the time,38 more severe even than an earlier hurricane in 1844.39 Waves were high enough to reach the lanterns of the Morro Castle lighthouse. While no concrete death toll was established, reports indicated the deaths of several dozen individuals during the entire course of the storm,40 while other records noted that hundreds of deaths had possibly occurred across the island.41
Spanish publications contained more detail, describing the hurricane's extensive damage on the island. In Havana, the hurricane damaged churches and four convents, and impaired roofs, walls, and windows at the University of Havana. The local Real Audiencia also suffered the loss of doors and walls, and the nearby governor house's main gate, walls, and Aztec lighting appliances were ruined. Post offices and the main theater also endured the storm's impacts, and at two military barracks, the storm wrecked walls and windows, and in one, a sump spilled over, tainting the city's supply of clean water. Another military instillation, the Castillo de San Pedro de la Roca, experienced similar effects, with cracked walls and windows; nevertheless, ship traffic monitoring there continued. Hospitals suffered significant damage, with one's wall and infirmary torn off; in addition, piles of guano, the local church, school, and hospital were destroyed by the hurricane at G&lt;U+00FC&gt;ines. In all, the hurricane caused some degree of damage to 2792 residences in Havana, with approximately 4000 houses damaged in both the city and its outskirts combined. Sugar, tobacco, and other goods were wrecked as a result of damage to shipping in the city. The cyclone uprooted about 1258 trees in Havana and left 2314 individuals homeless. Overall, the hurricane's swath of damage encompassed an area about  wide. The storm later produced high winds in the Bahamas without any reported damage.42
Southeastern United States
 The impacts of the hurricane were extreme throughout the state of Florida, especially in the Florida Keys. High winds washed away two lighthouses near Key West, resulting in the deaths of all 16 people at Sand Key Light and 14 individuals at the Key West lighthouse;43 although keeper Barbara Mabrity survived, seven of her children died while taking refuge there during the hurricane.44 The -storm surge in Key West proper swept through downtown and forced many to abandon their homes; many attempted to flee to higher ground but were still killed or injured. All wharves and warehouses in the town suffered some degree of damage, and of the approximately six hundred residences on the key, only six endured the storm's fury successfully, with the others unroofed or flattened by intense winds. Fort Zachary Taylor, partially obliterated by the hurricane, endured over $200,000 in damage, while the nearby customs-house was also harmed. Uprooted trees and debris from destroyed houses rendered roads impassable. The storm also changed the landscape within the vicinity, washing away Sand Key entirety.45 However, the island quickly resurfaced by that December, albeit  west of its original position.46 Every vessel at local harbor sustained serious damage; in addition, some 20 vessels were unaccounted for, and at least 40 deaths were documented,47 though another source suggested 50 lives were lost out at sea.48 An additional twelve died inland as a result death by being impaled, crushed, or drowned.49
Powerful winds and the storm's massive flood tide washed lumber and casks aboard ships. Massive pieces of timber, hurled across town, cracked walls and inflicted significant damage. Floodwaters  deep submerged already debris-clogged streets, with inundation as deep as  in the key's northeastern sector. There, the Lafayette Salt Company was swept away along with two military cemeteries. Floodwaters exhumed many skeletons and coffins in those graveyards, dispersing them across local forests.50 In downtown, both the Episcopal and Methodist chapels collapsed, and warehouses were moderately damaged.51 The town's new stone marine hospital, struck by the remnants of a wharf and a large raft, was nearly completely destroyed by the storm's intense winds. Lumber, crowbars, and cannon carriages from the construction site of Fort Zachary Taylor were scattered throughout the streets. High waters floated a camp stable  from its initial location, floating its horses and mules to safety. Four drowning deaths were chronicled at the fort, all having been swept away from the fort.52 Several wooden buildings along the shoreline, not tethered to the ground, drifted out to sea upon high waters due to the sheer force of the hurricane's gusts.53 Other notable maritime losses were also noted nearby, with the deaths of three on the Lafayette, which capsized offshore, one fatality each upon the Exchange and Frankford, and 19 casualties on the Villa Nueva; in addition, several other abandoned vessels were driven aground, apparently without any loss of life.54
The storm's path of devastation extended northward through the state. In Manatee County, a plantation owner and his horse drowned attempting to cross the elevated waters of the Little Manatee River.55 To the north at Fort Brooke, high winds felled several oak trees on the grounds of a local military installation,56 wholly uprooting several others. In nearby Tampa Bay proper, winds obliterated several houses and flattened fences.57 To the northeast at Jacksonville, the storm was more severe, with the hurricane's winds having been &quot;beyond anything in the recollection of ... the oldest inhabitant [of the town].&quot; Storm tides exceeded the previously recorded high water mark by , inundating numerous wharves and businesses along the path of Bay Street. By the time the storm's fury abated, the storm tossed wharves out to sea, wrecked structures along the St. Johns River, and rendered nearby saw mills' lumber worthless.58
Even along other, farther north, portions of the southeastern coast, the gale remained intense. At Savannah, Georgia, one fatality occurred at sea, and damage to fences, roofs, and trees was minor despite high winds,59 with debris from the remnants of chinaberry trees littering the streets of the city. A schooner capsized at Union Wharf, and farther down the coast at Tybee Island, another craft was washed aground. Within the vicinity of Darien, Georgia, the gale's high tides swamped rice fields, also impeding the impending harvest along the Savannah River in South Carolina.60 Although little rain fell farther north at Charleston, with merely  measured, gusts leveled wharves, uprooted trees, prostrated fences, and unroofed buildings. Despite copious rainfall measurements at Columbia, which received  of rainfall, damage was minimal and, for the most part, restricted to crops.61 The vessel Mutual Safety departed Charleston in the mid-afternoon of 10 October,62 but soon encountered the storm and experienced severe damage. In an effort to save the vessel's passengers, it was deliberately run ashore near Jacksonville, Florida, without the loss of any passengers on board; however, the steamer itself was not salvageable. A dozen ships beached or capsized in Charleston's harbors, with many wharves demolished along the city's shoreline. The western part of Tradd Street, especially near Chisolm's Mill and South Bay's sidewalk, eroded as a result of wind and water, which also fractured the South Bay and East Battery walls. Gusts unroofed the Trinity Church along Hasell Street; the roof itself landed in an adjacent graveyard.63 Despite extensive damage, only one death was noted in the city, that of a slave whose boat floundered at sea.64 Unexpectedly low storm tides of  at Georgetown, South Carolina and Wilmington, North Carolina inflicted no noteworthy damage. In general, however, the hurricane was reportedly the most severe since 1824 along the southeastern seaboard.65
Mid-Atlantic and Northeast
Not a single wharf at Baltimore, Maryland escaped the hurricane's storm surge, which inundated the length of Pratt Street along the shore; meanwhile, the Potomac River at Washington, D.C. and Alexandria, Virginia, attained its highest level in 20 years,66 with the latter two cities plagued by surface runoff on 13 October, following the storm's passage. The Chesapeake and Ohio Canal also bore the brunt of the storm's impact, having been swamped by potent rainfall as well.67 Low-lying areas along the Delaware River, including New Castle, Delaware, experienced storm tides not seen since the 1775 Newfoundland hurricane. The floodwaters were high enough to even extinguish a fire in a stationary locomotive which had been impeded by the gale's rainfall. The local Episcopal Church's steeple was tossed away by forceful gusts. To the north at Philadelphia, the tempest was the most intense in 30 years, with its high tides engulfing every wharf in the city; a total of  of rain was measured at Pennsylvania Hospital. Despite widespread destruction along the Delaware River, damage to buildings in Philadelphia proper was less severe.68 Heavy rainfall was also generated throughout western portions of the state.69 In neighboring New Jersey, considerable damage to structures, timber, land, and livestock was observed, with winds toppling several buildings and trees; widespread rainfall, meanwhile, flooded salt marshes, also drowning cattle and sheep.70 High winds tangled poles and wires, in turn interrupting telegraphic communications along the Washington-Baltimore-New York corridor.71
Damage was similarly severe in New England, despite its transition into a weaker extratropical cyclone. Despite being significantly farther east from New York City, significant damage was observed, with the waters of Upper New York Bay crashing over the Battery Park sea wall, washing away  of its length.72 Gusts caved in chimneys, uprooted trees, and sank several canal boats at the city's wharves.73 At Buffalo, a rupture along the Erie Canal interrupted nearby traffic, and to the east in Dansville, copious rainfall was also recorded. Approximately  of rain accompanied low atmospheric pressure readings throughout a wide area, with winds along the gale's eastern fringes, especially at Cape Cod, Massachusetts, remaining intense. In New England, it was generally considered to be the most severe storm since a previous disturbance in October 1841, despite having produced minimal rainfall totals throughout the region, including  at New Bedford. Gusts felled trees paralleling both sides of a roadway from Springfield to Amherst. Nearby at Worcester, winds flattened several factories, and also overturned a substantial number trees in the outskirts of Boston.74 A newly-built brick residence's walls in the southern end of the city collapsed; on the other side of the city, a sawing and planing mill was razed to the ground.75
Within the proximity of Boston at the towns of Canton and Southborough, winds obliterated two factories. High winds at Grafton collapsed the railroad sheds under the ownership of the Providence and Worcester Railroad. Malden endured the loss of a mansion which was still under construction, and several smaller buildings were also blown down there and at Monson. Winds upturned trees and toppled fences at Northampton, and nearby at Palmer, a school building was crumbled into pieces by intense winds. At Springfield, winds unroofed a repair facility at a local railroad depot and a house at the town armory. Gusts destroyed railroad sheds and factories in Stoughton and Worcester as well, and at Wilmington, winds crumbled a house into pieces.76 Slightly to the south in Norwich, Connecticut, fallen trees obstructed railroad tracks, and at Hartford, a railroad bridge was thrown farther upstream along the Connecticut River.77 Further railroad damage was noted to property owned by the Winchester and Potomac, Baltimore and Ohio, and other railroads throughout the region. Nearly all key bridges managed by those railroads were washed away, with many other track segments covered in debris.78 In all, the hurricane caused at least 164 deaths.79
Aftermath and records
 Officials in Cuba raised 8094 pesos in the days following the hurricane's passage.80 Immediately following the storm's end, the U.S. Army Quartermaster permitted homeless citizens to rest in its local barracks. Food, water, and supplies were lacking, with most having been washed away, rendered unusable, or become inedible due to the storm's salty storm surge. The Morris's captain obtained supplies from a damaged vessel, sending them to a local Methodist minister. Efforts to reconstruct and recover from the disaster were not immediate due to the lack of available resources. With the loss of area lighthouses, local waters were difficult to navigate, with one shipwreck occurring as a result west of Key West; in response, a  staff was placed at the former location of the now-destroyed Key West lighthouse. Many vessels were also lost near Sand Key Light,81 and decades later, the tower, poorly maintained due to a lack of government funding, continued to deteriorate.82 The 1846 hurricane resulted in a variety of both geological, geographical, and ecological alterations. In Key West, the local salt pond shifted from its original position, becoming a hindrance to local residents and requiring it to be filled up; eventually, the tourist district of Key West emerged over the former site of the salt pond. By December 1846, Sand Key, which was inundated during the hurricane, resurfaced from the waters of the Atlantic. However, it was situated approximately  west of its location prior to the hurricane, and even months later, the lighthouse remained under  of seawater.83 Years afterward, greenery on the key was sparse, and little native vegetation existed. Signs of ecological damage remained even in the early 1880s, evidenced by the presence of rushes among the leaves of trees and bushes.84
The 1846 Havana hurricane was likely of Category 5 intensity, the earliest known tropical cyclone of its strength to strike Cuba. 85 In 1993, the weather historian Jose Fernandez-Partag&lt;U+00E1&gt;s analyzed an anomalous atmospheric pressure of 916 mbar (27.06 inHg) measured at Havana, Cuba upon the vessel Thames, deeming it to be abnormally low and evaluating its true value to be closer to 938 mbar (27.70 inHg), making the hurricane the most intense in recorded history at the time.s1993-1&quot;/&gt; The exceptionally low pressure reading in Cuba surpassed a previous record of 948 mbar (28.00 inHg) set by an 1844 storm, with the new record eventually exceeded by the 1924 Cuba hurricane, which featured a manually recorded pressure reading of 932 mbar (27.52 inHg).86{{#tag:ref|Although the 1910 Cuba hurricane also exceeded the record and the 1924 Cuba hurricane each had lower pressures in the HURDAT database, those pressure measurements were estimated. For the purposes of this article, all pressure records are not estimated.|group=&quot;nb&quot;}}
See also
List of Florida hurricanes (pre-1900)
List of New England hurricanes
1846 Atlantic hurricane season
1924 Cuba hurricane
Notes
Footnotes
Citations
References
1846 Category:1840&lt;U+2013&gt;1849 Atlantic hurricane seasons 1846 1846 1846 Category:Spanish colonial period of Cuba Hurricane, 1846 Havana hurricane Hurricane Havana hurricane
Chenoweth 2006, p. 234↩
Tannehill 1938, p. 156↩
Ludlum 1963, p. 151↩
Landsea et al. 2012, p. 883↩
↩
Partag&lt;U+00E1&gt;s 1993, p. 1↩
Ludlum 1963, p. 152↩
Ludlum 1963, p. 153↩
Ludlum 1963, p. 94↩
Ludlum 1963, p. 95↩
Boose et al. 2001, p. 40↩
↩
Singer 1998, p. 72↩
Singer 1998, p. 73↩
Williams 1992, p. 73↩
Schwartz 2007, p. 16↩
Malcolm 2010, p. 3↩
 ↩
De Wire 1995, p. 124↩
Malcolm 2010, p. 10↩
Barnes 2007, p. 60↩
Malcolm 2010, p. 9↩
Malcolm 2010, p. 8↩
Malcolm 2010, p. 14↩
Fraser 2009, p. 119↩
Fraser 2009, p. 118↩
Fraser 2009, p. 120↩
Ludlum 1963, p. 94↩
Schwartz 2007, p. 61↩
Ludlum 1963, p. 95↩
↩
↩
Malcolm 2010, p. 11↩
Partag&lt;U+00E1&gt;s 1993, p. 4↩
