The Bristol Bus Boycott of 1963, arose from the refusal of the Bristol Omnibus Company to employ Black or Asian bus crews in Bristol, UK and area. In common with other British cities there was widespread discrimination in housing and employment against &quot;coloureds&quot;. Led by youth worker Paul Stephenson and the West Indian Development Council, the boycott of the company's buses by Bristolians lasted for sixty days until the company backed down and overturned the colour bar.
The campaign was considered by some to have been influential in the passing of the Race Relations Acts of 1965 and which made &quot;racial discrimination unlawful in public places.&quot; and the Race Relations Act 1968, which extended the provisions to employment and housing.
Background
Bristol in the early 1960s had an estimated 3,000 residents of West Indian origin, some who had served in the armed forces during World War II, some who had emigrated to Britain more recently. A large number of them lived in the area around City Road, St Pauls, Bristol. They suffered discrimination in housing and employment and some encountered violence from teddy boy gangs of white youths.1 This community set up their own churches and associations, including the West Indian Association, which began to act as a representative body.2
One of their foremost grievances was the colour bar operated by the Bristol Omnibus Company, which was a nationalised company owned by the British Government since 1950, and operated through the Transport Holding Company.3 Although there was a reported labour shortage on the buses, black prospective employees were refused work as bus crews, although they were employed in workshops and canteens. The Bristol Evening Post and the Western Daily Press both ran series on the colour bar, which was blamed by company management on the Transport and General Workers' Union (TGWU), which represented bus workers.4 Local union officials denied that there was any colour bar but in 1955 the Passenger Group of the TGWU had passed a resolution that coloured workers should not be employed as bus crews. Andrew Hake, curate of the Bristol Industrial Mission recalled that &quot;The TGWU in the city had said that if one black man steps on the platform as a conductor, every wheel will stop.&quot;5
The bus workers' concern, apart from the racism which was common at that time, was that a new source of labour could reduce their earnings. Pay was low and workers relied on overtime to get a good wage. One shop steward said, &quot;people were fearful of an influx of people from elsewhere (on the grounds it) would be reducing their earnings potential.&quot;6
Boycott
Four young West Indian men, Roy Hackett, Owen Henry, Audley Evans and Prince Brown formed an action group, later to be called the West Indian Development Council, as they were unhappy with the lack of progress in fighting discrimination by the West Indian Association. Owen Henry had met Paul Stephenson whose father was from West Africa and who had been to college. The group decided that the articulate Stephenson would be their spokesman.7 Stephenson set up a test case to prove the colour bar existed by arranging an interview with the bus company for a young warehouseman and Boys' Brigade officer, Guy Bailey. When Stephenson then told the company that Bailey was West Indian, the interview was cancelled.8 Inspired by the refusal of Rosa Parks to give up her seat on a bus in Alabama and the ensuing Montgomery Bus Boycott, the activists decided on a bus boycott in Bristol.9
Their action was announced at a press conference and they lobbied Bristol Labour MPs Stan Awbery and Tony Benn. When reporters questioned the bus company about the boycott, the general manager, Ian Patey, &quot;said today the company's policy regarding coloured labour had been clear for years and the action by the West Indians would not make them reconsider their policy. We don't employ a mixed labour force as bus crews because we have found from observing other bus companies that the labour supply gets worse if the labour force is mixed.&quot;1011
The local branch of the TGWU refused to meet with a delegation from the West Indian Development Council, and an increasingly bitter war of words was fought out in the local media. Ron Nethercott, South West Regional Secretary of the union launched an attack on Stephenson in the Daily Herald newspaper, calling him &quot;dishonest&quot; and &quot;irresponsible&quot;. This led to a libel case in the High Court, which awarded Stephenson damages and costs.12 The Bristol Council of Churches launched a mediation attempt, saying
We seriously regret that what may prove an extended racial conflict arising from this issue has apparently been deliberately created by a small group of West Indians professing to be representative. We also deplore the apparent fact that social and economic fears on the part of some white people should have placed the Bristol Bus Company in a position where it is most difficult to fulfil the Christian ideal of race relations.13
This in turn was criticised by Robert Davison, an official at the Jamaican High Commission, who stated that it was &quot;nonsense to describe a group of West Indians as unrepresentative when no representative West Indian body existed.&quot;14 University students marched in protest and Harold Wilson, then Labour Leader of the Opposition spoke out against the colour bar at an Anti-Apartheid rally in London.15 Tony Benn, Fenner Brockway and former cricketer Learie Constantine also condemned the bus company.16
Constantine was serving as High Commissioner for Trinidad and Tobago and he went to the Bristol Omnibus Company's parent, the Transport Holding Company and persuaded them to send officials to talk with the union. The company chairman told Constantine that racial discrimination was not company policy.17 Eventually, on 28 August 1963, the colour bar was lifted following a meeting attended by 500 bus company employees.18 It was the same day that Martin Luther King made his famous &quot;I Have a Dream&quot; speech at the March on Washington. On 17 September, a Sikh, Raghbir Singh became Bristol's first non white bus conductor. A few days later two Jamaican and two Pakistani men joined him.19
Aftermath
In 1965, the United Kingdom Parliament passed a Race Relations Act, which made &quot;racial discrimination unlawful in public places.&quot;20 This was followed by the Race Relations Act 1968 which extended the provisions to housing and employment.21 The enactment of this legislation has been cited by some as having been influenced by the Bristol bus boycott.22 In 2003, as part of Black History Month, BBC Radio 4 broadcast a programme about the boycott.23
See also
Racism
Anti-discrimination law
Civil and political rights
1957 Alexandra Bus Boycott
Notes
Works cited
Dresser, Madge. Black and White on the Buses: The 1963 Colour Bar Dispute in Bristol. [Bristol] Bristol Broadsides, 1986 ISBN 0-906944-30-9
Samuel, Raphael. Patriotism: History and Politics v.1: The Making and Unmaking of British National Identity: History and Politics Vol 1 (History Workshop). [New York] Routledge, 1989 ISBN 0-415-01307-0
External links
Joyce Morris-Wisdom's account of here participation in the boycott
Student Thesis: Racial Discrimination in employment? The Bristol bus boycott of 1963, Joyce Chappell, 2007
Short video clip from the BBC learning Zone on the Bristol Bus Boycott
Category:Bristol Category:History of Bristol Category:Civil rights protests Category:Boycotts of organizations Category:Protests in England Category:Conflicts in 1963 Category:Black British history
Dresser 1986, p. 10-11↩
Dresser 1986, p. 12↩
Samuel 1989, p. 350↩
Dresser 1986, p. 13-14↩
Dresser 1986, p. 39↩
Dresser 1986, p. 14-15↩
Dresser 1986, p. 17↩
↩
Dresser 1986, p. 20↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
Dresser 1986, p. 21-28↩
↩
Dresser 1986, p. 47↩
Dresser 1986, p. 50↩
↩
↩
Dresser 1986, p. 57↩
↩
