Progressive Primitive Baptists
The religious denomination known as Progressive Primitive Baptists is comprised of 95 churches located in nine states and one church in Haiti.1
Controversy Over the Use of Musical Instruments
In the early 1900&lt;U+2019&gt;s, Primitive Baptists Associations in the state of Georgia began to exclude churches from their membership that utilized the organ in worship services. The churches that utilized instrumental music in worship began to be known as Progressive Primitive Baptists. These churches formed their own Associations and became the Progressive Primitive Baptist denomination. The minutes of the 1907 Echeconnee Association (in Central Georgia) record an exclusion of churches and include this resolution outlining the Association&lt;U+2019&gt;s stance:2
Resolution
Whereas, the Primitive Baptists have been greatly disturbed by the introduction of new and unscriptural practices in their worship, viz; Instrumental music, secret orders and other things of like character; therefore, be it Resolved, That we declare against these measures in our churches together with all others that practice or affiliate with the same.
A New and Separate Group of Primitive Baptists
The Augusta Chronicle noted this division, in their newspaper article of October, 8 1909 detailing two separate Primitive Baptist groups naming one side as the Progressive Primitive Baptists:3
Churches of Progressive and Non-Progressive Primitives Met in Emanuel County
Swainsboro, Ga., October 7 &lt;U+2013&gt; The Primitive Baptists of Emanuel, Bulloch and Jefferson counties have just closed their annual association, the Progressive Primitives holding their meeting at Bethesda church near Wadley and the Non-Progressive Primitives holding their meeting at New Hope church in this county.
Before a split in the Primitive Baptist ranks which occurred about a year ago, these two bodies formed the Upper Canoochee Association and consisted of nineteen churches embracing a large membership, but because a large percentage of the churches advocated the use of organs in their churches as well as the principle that they should pay their preachers, no longer adhering to the old primitive methods, the association split asunder, both calling themselves Upper Canoochee Association, and that a spirit of unfriendliness exists between them is shown by the fact that they both held their associations on the same dates&lt;U+2026&gt;
The Banner Herald
The Progressive Primitive cause and unification was aided by the publication of a monthly periodical edited by R.H. Barwick and William H. Crouse, called The Primitive Banner.4 In 1918, this periodical merged with the Primitive Herald and became known as The Banner-Herald . The merged paper was owned by a committee of Progressive Primitive Baptists as opposed to a single person.5 Today, The Banner Herald remains the denomination&lt;U+2019&gt;s magazine and it publishes the annual directory of Progressive Primitive Baptist churches.6
References
Pat McCoy editor, Directory Of Progressive Primitive Baptist Churches and Ministers, Culloden, GA: The Banner Herald,2013↩
Minutes of the 1907 Echeconnee Association meeting at Salem Church, Crawford County, GA, September 13-15th 1907↩
&lt;U+201C&gt;Churches of Progressive and Non Progressives Met In Emanuel County,&lt;U+201D&gt; Augusta Chronicle, October 8, 1909↩
R. H. Barwick, &lt;U+201C&gt;A Change,&lt;U+201D&gt; The Pilgrim&lt;U+2019&gt;s Banner, September, 1918↩
Emerson Proctor, &lt;U+201D&gt;Elder William H. Crouse: Primitive Baptist Pastor and Religious Writer&lt;U+201D&gt;,(paper for Ga. Baptist Historical Society), 2011, page 12↩
