The Confederate Memorial Gateway in Hickman, Kentucky is a historic cemetery gateway in Fulton County, Kentucky. It was funded in 1913 by the Private Robert Tyler Chapter of the United Daughters of the Confederacy.1
The Memorial Gateway was designed by Sir Moses Ezekiel, and built by the NcNeal Marble Company of Marietta, Georgia. It took ten years and $10,000 to construct the granite structure.2 The back is solid granite, but the front has ornamentation. The names of seventy Confederate soldiers are carved upon the hoods of the structure. It has a center opening for vehicles, and two side openings for pedestrian traffic. The inscription on its capstone reads: &quot;1861 Our Heroes 1865&quot;. Due to its size and how long after the war it was built, it was meant more to celebrate the Confederate States of America instead of mourning it, even through it was built in a cemetery.3
Due to its presence on the Mississippi River, Hickman was placed at a strategic point, and was held by both sides during the war. It was strongly pro-Confederate during the war, but after the Confederate lost control of the county in 1862, it would see occasional raids by Confederate cavalry.45
On July 17, 1997, it was one of sixty-one different monuments to the Civil War in Kentucky placed on the National Register of Historic Places, as part of the Civil War Monuments of Kentucky Multiple Property Submission. The only other monument on the list that is a gateway is the Confederate Memorial Gates in Mayfield. One other monument on the list is in Fulton County: the Confederate Memorial in Fulton, located twenty miles to the east in Fulton, Kentucky.6
Gallery
 File:Confederate Memorial Gateway in Hickman back.JPG|Back of gateway
 File:Confederate Memorial Gateway in Hickman far.JPG|Far view of gateway
References
Category:Civil War Monuments of Kentucky MPS Category:National Register of Historic Places in Fulton County, Kentucky Category:Buildings and structures in Fulton County, Kentucky Category:Confederate States of America monuments and memorials in Kentucky
Hickman, Ky. Trailsrus.com↩
Brent, Joseph. Confederate Memorial Gateway in Hickman NRHP Nomination Form (Kentucky Heritage Council, 1997)↩
Kleber, John E. The Kentucky Encyclopedia. (University Press of Kentucky, 1992). pg.360↩
↩
