Jon &amp; Kate Plus 8 is a reality television show produced in the United States by Figure 8 Films about the Gosselin family, consisting of parents Jon and Kate and their eight children&lt;U+2014&gt;a set of fraternal twin girls and a set of sextuplets (three girls and three boys). The show follows the family through their daily lives, focusing on the challenges of raising multiple children. The show originally aired on Discovery Health, but has aired on TLC since season 3. It is consistently one of the highest rated shows on TLC. The family originally appeared in a one-hour special titled Surviving Sextuplets and Twins. The family resides in .
Family history
Kate Irene Gosselin is one of five children.1 She has three sisters and a brother. Jonathan Gosselin is the middle child of three boys. The couple met on October 5, 1997 at a picnic. They were married on June 12, 1999.
The Gosselin's desire to start a family was met with infertility. Kate underwent medical testing and was diagnosed with polycystic ovary syndrome. The couple turned to fertility treatments and immediately began intrauterine insemination.2 By February 2000, Kate was pregnant with twins. On October 8, 2000, Cara Nicole and Madelyn &quot;Mady&quot; Kate Gosselin were born, six minutes apart.3
On the couple's appearance on The Oprah Winfrey Show, which aired on February 22, 2008, Kate admitted that she wanted to have another child, while Jon was hesitant because he felt like the world is built for a family of four. According to Kate, a biracial infant of a teenage girl became available to adopt while Kate was an obstetrics nurse. They decided not to adopt the baby, but instead returned to fertility treatment.4 By October, Kate was again pregnant. Five weeks later (after being hospitalized for over-stimulated ovaries), at the initial ultrasound, the doctor announced that there were six sacs with seven yolks (embryos). According to Kate, this was very emotional news for them. The doctor suggested selective reduction, but the couple was absolutely against doing so.5
The sextuplets were born on May 10, 2004 at Penn State Milton S. Hershey Medical Center in Hershey, Pennsylvania. All six children were delivered within a span of three minutes with more than fifty doctors, nurses, and other specialists involved. Since the sextuplets were born in Hershey, they were called &quot;Hershey Kisses&quot; by the nurses and doctors who delivered them. The family moved from their Elizabethtown, Pennsylvania home to a new residence in Wernersville in order to accommodate their unique living requirements.
Children
Twins - Born October 8, 2000:
Cara Nicole Gosselin
Madelyn Kate Gosselin
Sextuplets - Born May 10, 2004 in birth order:
Alexis Faith Gosselin &lt;U+2014&gt; 2 lbs 11.5 oz (1.23 kg), 
Hannah Joy Gosselin &lt;U+2014&gt; 2 lbs 11 oz (1.2 kg), 
Aaden Jonathan Gosselin &lt;U+2014&gt; 2 lbs 7.5 oz (1.12 kg), 
Collin Thomas Gosselin &lt;U+2014&gt; 3 lbs 0.5 oz (1.4 kg), 
Leah Hope Gosselin &lt;U+2014&gt; 2 lbs 14.8 oz (1.18 kg), 
Joel Kevin Gosselin &lt;U+2014&gt; 2 lbs 9.7 oz (1.33 kg), 
Production
DiscoveryHealth starting filming the show in the form of two hour-long specials, then TLC continued filming for a weekly series when the sextuplets were a year old.
Between the specials and the series, permanent light fixtures were installed in the Gosselins' home to facilitate filming and prevent the children from tripping over the wires and cables of temporary lighting. Jon &amp; Kate Plus 8 is filmed three days a week with one day set aside for the interview sessions where Jon, Kate, and occasionally the children, discuss the events which take place in each episode. Jon and Kate also work closely with producers to decide what themes will be presented in each episode. Jon and Kate have remarked that over the years the production crew has become part of the family since they have estranged themselves from their own family.6
Multimedia
Kate Gosselin has written two books, one called Multiple Blessings which was released November 1, 2008; it entered the list of New York Times best-sellers a week after its release. Originally, the book was listed with Kate Gosselin and Beth Carson as co-authors, however the cover credits Jon as a co-author as well. The other, Eight Little Faces, is planned for a future release.7
Seasons 1 and 2 were released on DVD on July 16, 2008, distributed online only by Discovery.&lt;ref name&quot;first dvd&quot;&gt; It was released to mass market on September 9, 2008 (October 21, 2008 in Canada), to be distributed by Genius. After this, TLC started selling Season 1 and Season 2 on separate DVDs.
Season 3 was released in November 2008 by TLC. It is coming to the mass market on February 3, 2009.8
The Gosselins are managed by Media Motion International in Los Angeles.9
Episodes
References
External links
TLC: Jon &amp; Kate + 8
Gosselin Sextuplets &amp; Twins - The official family website
Figure 8 Films - Surviving Sextuplets &amp; Twins
Category:American reality television series Category:Discovery Channel Category:TLC (TV channel) programs Category:Multiple births Category:Television shows set in Pennsylvania Category:People from Pennsylvania Category:People from Lancaster County, Pennsylvania Category:2007 television series debuts
Gosselin, Kate (July 3, 2008). &quot;Naptime Musings From Jon &amp; Kate Plus 8&quot;. Orato. Retrieved on July 3, 2008.↩
↩
↩
↩
Multiple Blessings: Surviving To Thriving with Twins and Sextuplets book listing. Christianbooks.com. Retrieved on July 3, 2008.↩
↩
Media Motion International client listing. mediamotionintl.com. Retrieved on July 3, 2008.↩
