Paulinus (died 10 October 644) was a Roman missionary and the first Bishop of York.{{#tag:ref|York did not become an archbishopric until 735.1|group=notes}} A member of the Gregorian mission sent by Pope Gregory I to convert the Anglo-Saxons to Christianity in 601, Paulinus arrived in England by 604 with the second missionary group. Little is known of Paulinus' activities in the following two decades.
After some years spent in Kent, Paulinus was consecrated a bishop, probably in 627. He accompanied &lt;U+00C6&gt;thelburg of Kent, sister of King Eadbald of Kent, on her journey to Northumbria to marry King Edwin of Northumbria, and eventually succeeded in converting Edwin to Christianity. Paulinus also converted many of Edwin's subjects and built a few churches. One of the women Paulinus baptised was a future saint, Hilda of Whitby. Following Edwin's death in 633 Paulinus and &lt;U+00C6&gt;thelburg fled Northumbria, leaving behind a member of Paulinus' clergy, James the Deacon. Paulinus returned to Kent, where he became Bishop of Rochester. After his death in 644, Paulinus was venerated as a saint.
Early life
Paulinus was a monk from Rome sent to the Kingdom of Kent by Pope Gregory I in 601, together with Mellitus and others, as part of the second group of missionaries sent to convert the Anglo-Saxons to Christianity. He was probably an Italian by birth.2 The second group of missionaries arrived in Kent by 604, but little is known of Paulinus' further activities until he went to Northumbria.3
Paulinus remained in Kent until 625, when he was consecrated as bishop by Justus, the Archbishop of Canterbury, on 21 July.4 He then accompanied &lt;U+00C6&gt;thelburg, the sister of King Eadbald, to Northumbria where she was to marry King Edwin. Edwin had promised that he would allow &lt;U+00C6&gt;thelburg to remain a Christian and worship as she chose. The medieval writer Bede reports that Paulinus wished to convert the Northumbrians, as well as provide religious services to the new queen.5 There is some difficulty with Bede's chronology on the date of &lt;U+00C6&gt;thelburg's marriage, as surviving papal letters to Edwin urging him to convert imply that Ealdbald had only recently become a Christian, which conflicts with Bede's chronology. The historian D. P. Kirby argues that Paulinus and &lt;U+00C6&gt;thelburg must therefore have gone to Northumbria earlier than 624, and that Paulinus went north not as a bishop but as a priest, returning later to be consecrated.6 The historian Henry Mayr-Harting agrees with Kirby's reasoning.7 Another historian, Peter Hunter Blair, argues that &lt;U+00C6&gt;thelburg and Edwin were married before 625, but that she did not go to Northumbria until 625.8 If Kirby's arguments are accepted, then the date of Paulinus' consecration needs to be set back a year, to 21 July 626.9
Bede describes Paulinus as &quot;a man tall of stature, a little stooping, with black hair and a thin face, a hooked and thin nose, his aspect both venerable and awe-inspiring&quot;.10 Bede probably obtained this description from James the Deacon, one of Paulinus' associates, who was still alive in Bede's time.11
Bishop of York
 Bede relates that Paulinus told Edwin that the birth of his and &lt;U+00C6&gt;thelburg's daughter at Easter 626 was because of Paulinus' prayers. The birth coincided with a foiled assassination attempt on the king by a group of West Saxons from Wessex. Edwin promised to convert to Christianity and allow his new daughter Eanfl&lt;U+00E6&gt;d to be baptised if he won a victory over Wessex. He did not fulfil his promise immediately after his subsequent military success against the West Saxons though, only converting after Paulinus had revealed the details of a dream the king had had before he took the throne, during his exile at the court of King R&lt;U+00E6&gt;dwald of East Anglia. In this dream, according to Bede, a stranger told Edwin that power would be his in the future when someone laid a hand on his head. As Paulinus was revealing the dream to Edwin, he laid his hand on the king's head, which was the proof Edwin needed. A late 7th-century hagiography of Pope Gregory I claims that Paulinus was the stranger in the vision;12 if true, it might suggest that Paulinus spent some time at R&lt;U+00E6&gt;dwald's court,13 although Bede does not mention any such visit.14
It is unlikely that it was supernatural affairs and Paulinus' persuasion alone that caused Edwin to convert. The Northumbrian nobles seem to have been willing, and the king also received letters from Pope Boniface V urging his conversion.15 Eventually convinced, Edwin and many of his followers were baptised at York in 627.16 One story relates that during a stay with Edwin and &lt;U+00C6&gt;thelburg at their palace in Yeavering, Paulinus spent 36 days baptising new converts.17 Paulinus was also an active missionary in Lindsey.18
Pope Gregory's plan had been that York would be England's second metropolitan see, so Paulinus established his church there.19 Although built of stone, no trace of it has been found.20 Paulinus also built a number of churches on royal estates.21 His church in Lincoln has been identified with the earliest building phase of the church of St Paul in the Bail in Lincoln.22
Among those consecrated by Paulinus were Hilda, later the abbess of Whitby Abbey,23 and Hilda's successor Eanfl&lt;U+00E6&gt;d, Edwin's daughter.24 As the only Roman bishop in England, Paulinus also consecrated another Gregorian missionary, Honorius, as Archbishop of Canterbury after Justus' death, some time between 628 and 631.25
Bishop of Rochester
Edwin was defeated by the Welsh and died at the Battle of Hatfield Chase, on a date traditionally given as 12 October 633.26 One problem with the dating of the battle is that Pope Honorius I wrote in June 634 to Paulinus and Archbishop Honorius saying that he was sending a pallium, the symbol of an archbishop's authority, to each of them. The pope's letter shows no hint that news of Edwin's death had reached Rome, almost nine months after the supposed date of the battle. The historian D. P. Kirby argues that this lack of awareness makes it more likely that the battle occurred in 634.27
Edwin's defeat and death caused his kingdom to fragment into at least two parts.28 It also led to a sharp decline in Christianity in Northumbria29 when Edwin's immediate successors reverted to paganism.30 Although Paulinus' deacon, James, remained in the north and struggled to rebuild the Roman mission,31 Edwin's widow decided to return to Kent. Paulinus went with her, taking Edwin and &lt;U+00C6&gt;thelburg's son and daughter, as well as one of Edwin's grandsons. The two boys went to the continent for safety, to the court of King Dagobert I. &lt;U+00C6&gt;thelburg, Eanfl&lt;U+00E6&gt;d, and Paulinus remained in Kent, where Paulinus was offered the see, or bishopric, of Rochester, which he held until his death. Because the pallium did not reach Paulinus until after he had left York, it was of no use to him.32
Death and veneration
Paulinus died on 10 October 644 at Rochester,33{{#tag:ref|If Kirby's arguments on the date of Paulinus' consecration is accepted, this date would be 10 October 645 instead.34|group=notes}} where he was buried in the sacristy of the church.35 His successor at Rochester was Ithamar, the first Englishman consecrated to a Gregorian missionary see.36 After Paulinus' death, Paulinus was revered as a saint, with a feast day on 10 October. When a new church was constructed at Rochester in the 1080s his relics, or remains, were translated (ritually moved) to a new shrine.37 There were also shrines to Paulinus at Canterbury, and at least five churches were dedicated to him.38 Although Rochester held some of Paulinus' relics, the promotion of his cult there appears to have occurred after the Norman Conquest of England.39 He is considered a saint by both the Roman Catholic Church and the Anglican Communion.4041
Paulinus' missionary efforts are difficult to evaluate. Bede implies that the mission in Northumbria was successful, but there is little supporting evidence, and it is more likely that Paulinus' missionary efforts there were relatively ineffectual. Although Osric, one of Edwin's successors, was converted to Christianity by Paulinus, he returned to paganism after Edwin's death. Hilda, however, remained a Christian, and eventually went on to become abbess of the influential Whitby Abbey.42 Northumbria's conversion to Christianity was mainly achieved by Irish missionaries brought into the region by Edwin's eventual successor, Oswald.43
See also
List of members of the Gregorian mission
Notes
Citations
References
Accessed 6 March 2009
External links
Prosopography of Anglo Saxon England entry for Paulinus - listing of most contemporary and close to contemporary mentions of Paulinus in the primary sources. Includes some spurious charter listings.
de:Paulinus von York fr:Paulin d'York nl:Paulinus van York no:Paulinus av York
Category:644 deaths Category:Anglo-Saxon saints Category:Yorkshire saints Category:History of Northumberland Category:Archbishops of York Category:Bishops of Rochester Category:7th-century bishops Category:7th-century Christian saints Category:Burials at Rochester Cathedral
Lapidge &quot;Ecgbert&quot; Blackwell Encyclopedia of Anglo-Saxon England↩
Costambeys &quot;Paulinus (St Paulinus) (d. 644)&quot; Oxford Dictionary of National Biography↩
Fryde, et. al. Handbook of British Chronology p. 224↩
Mayr-Harting Coming of Christianity p. 66↩
Kirby Earliest English Kings pp. 33&lt;U+2013&gt;34↩
Kirby Earliest English Kings p. 206 footnote 2↩
Quoted in Blair World of Bede p. 95↩
Blair World of Bede pp. 95&lt;U+2013&gt;96↩
Yorke Kings and Kingdoms p. 28↩
Lapidge &quot;Paulinus&quot; Blackwell Encyclopedia of Anglo-Saxon England↩
Stenton Anglo-Saxon England pp. 115&lt;U+2013&gt;116↩
Yorke Conversion of Britain p. 161↩
Blair World of Bede p. 147↩
Blair World of Bede p. 149↩
Kirby Earliest English Kings p. 56↩
Stenton Anglo-Saxon England p. 116↩
Fryde, et. al. Handbook of British Chronology p. 221↩
Blair World of Bede pp. 97&lt;U+2013&gt;98↩
Sharpe &quot;Naming of Bishop Ithamar&quot; English Historical Journal p. 889↩
Farmer Oxford Dictionary of Saints p. 418↩
 Accessed on 29 March 2009↩
Holford-Stevens and Blackburn Oxford Book of Days p. 409↩
Walsh Dictionary of Saints p. 475↩
Mayr-Harting Coming of Christianity p. 68↩
