 Tusk is the name of the official live mascot for the University of Arkansas Razorbacks. It is one of three offspring of Tusk I (all male; female swine do not have tusks) which were born on either August 2, 2002 or August 12, 2002, to two separate female sows. All three are Russian boars, resemble wild razorback hogs, and weigh in at approximately 475 pounds each.
All three Russian boars live on a rural farm, just outside of Dardanelle, Arkansas, and travel to every home football game at Fayetteville, or Little Rock, Arkansas, as well as other select events (such as pep rallies). Tusk III is put into a spacious cardinal red holding pen which travels through the crowds, with the cheerleaders on the upper level, making him a crowd favorite. During the actual game, Tusk is moved into Donald W. Reynolds Razorback Stadium where he can be seen by the entire crowd.
Tusk II died on January 5, 2010 and his brother, Tusk III took over as the Razorback mascot. Tusk III, along with UGA, the Georgia Bulldog mascot, and Smokey, the bluetick coonhound of the Tennessee Volunteers, are the only lineage live mascots in the SEC. There are only a few lineage mascots in the entire country.
Tusk III occupies a  indoor facility and a  fenced outdoor area. He uses the indoor facility to escape the heat and sun, and the outdoor facility provides him the opportunity to slop in several mud holes. One of the first things that Tusk III does each day is to go straight to his mud hole for a mud bath. Since Razorbacks are extremely muscular and have very little body fat, the mud keeps him cooler throughout the day and protects him from the sun and insects.
Other Facts About Tusk
Russian boars are extremely strong and surprisingly quick and fast for their size. Tusk II repeatedly jumped over a four foot gate, at a weight of almost 500 pounds.
Tusk II signed autographs. An actual hoof print of Tusk II was taken and applied to an ink stamp that can be used on paper or T-shirts. Kids and Razorback fans could request the stamp where ever Tusk II made an appearance.
Tusk II had a Facebook page that can be found by searching for Tusk Razorback Mascot.
Previous University of Arkansas live mascots
In addition to Tusk I (the father of the current Tusks who died in December 2004), the live mascot tradition dates back to the 1960s and a number of hogs have represented the university through the years. In addition to their presence on the sidelines of sporting events, some have also gained a reputation for some of their activities off the field. The live mascot was once called &quot;Big Red&quot;, but now it is the name for a human mascot Big Red (University of Arkansas).
Big Red III, for instance, escaped from an animal exhibit near Eureka Springs in the summer of 1977 and ravaged the countryside before an irate farmer gunned him down. Ragnar, a wild hog captured in south Arkansas by Leola farmer Bill Robinson, killed a coyote, a 450-pound domestic pig, and seven rattlesnakes. Ragnar died in 1978 of unknown causes.
External links
Article on Tusk and how he is cared for before a game
Tusk Profile at ArkansasRazorbacks.com
Tusk Photo Gallery at ArkansasRazorbacks.com
University of Arkansas traditions (Tusk and others)
Category:College mascots in the United States Category:University of Arkansas
