In 1904 the Central South African Railways placed a single experimental 0-6-0+0-6-0 Kitson-Meyer type articulated steam locomotive in service, classified as Class M. In 1912, when the locomotive was assimilated into the South African Railways, later renamed Spoornet and then Transnet Freight Rail, it was renumbered and reclassified to Class KM.123
Manufacturer
In 1903 the English locomotive builders Kitson and Company convinced the Cape Government Railways (CGR), the Beira and Mashonaland Railway (B&amp;MR) and the Central South African Railways (CSAR) to try their new 0-6-0+0-6-0 Kitson-Meyer type articulated steam locomotive. One locomotive was delivered to the CGR in 1903 and numbered 800, two to the B&amp;MR, numbered 51 and 52, and one to the CSAR in 1904, numbered 1000.45
Characteristics
The Kitson-Meyer design consisted of two sets of coupled driving wheels under the frame with both power units free to swivel in relation to the frame. Compared to the usual practice on steam locomotives, the sets of driving wheels were both mounted back to front, with the driving wheels to the front of the cylinders. The rear power unit discharged its exhaust steam up a chimney mounted in the coal bunker to the rear of the cab, while the forward cylinders discharged in the usual manner up a chimney mounted on the smokebox in front of the boiler.6
The Kitson-Meyer was a development of the Meyer locomotive. On a Meyer locomotive the two engines or power units were mounted close together, and usually with the cylinder ends of the sets of driving wheels facing each other at the centre of the locomotive. One disadvantage of this design was that the rear power unit was directly beneath the firebox, thereby limiting it in size.7
On the Kitson-Meyer locomotive, on the other hand, the rear power unit was located further back, which allowed the firebox to be between the two power units as on a Garratt locomotive, thereby making a much larger firebox possible. This also increased the length of the locomotive, making it possible to utilise the additional length behind the cab for a coal and water bunker. The auxiliary chimney at the rear avoided the need to have an exhaust steam pipe running the length of the engine.8
The Kitson-Meyer locomotives delivered to Southern Africa had Walschaerts valve gear. They carried no water, but had a coal bunker to the rear of the cab with a capacity of . Water was carried in the tender, which had a water capacity of  as well as an additional coal capacity of .9
Modifications
All three railways found their Kitson-Meyers to be poor steamers and, as built, none of these locomotives had a long service life.10
While the Kitson-Meyer could handle a one-third heavier load than a Class 8 on the CGR, it was found that the boiler could not supply sufficient steam for the four cylinders on longer runs. Modifications to the tender to increase its water capacity from  by decreasing the coal capacity did not prove to be a solution.11
The real cause of the problem could probably be ascribed to the fact that the exhaust steam from the rear power unit contributed nothing to the smokebox draught, the same phenomenon that necessitated the installation of induced draught equipment on the Class 25 condensers half a century later.12
Under the guidance of L.S. Smart, who had succeeded P.A. Hyde as Chief Locomotive Superintendent of the CSAR in 1905, the CSAR followed a different approach towards a solution. Certain modifications were carried out to their Kitson-Meyer locomotive in 1906. The main alteration was to reduce the diameter of the cylinders to bring them within the range of the boiler&lt;U+2019&gt;s steam generating capacity. While this reduced the locomotive&lt;U+2019&gt;s tractive force, it did result in making the Kitson-Meyer a reasonably good performer.1314
Service
The CGR&lt;U+2019&gt;s Kitson-Meyer locomotive was placed in service on the Cape Eastern System, working out of East London. By 1908, however, it was standing staged out of service and remained so until it was withdrawn from service in 1911 and scrapped in 1912. It therefore did not come onto the SAR roster during the 1912 renumbering and reclassification scheme.1516
The two B&amp;MR Kitson-Meyer locomotives were also found to be poor performers and were also withdrawn and scrapped in 1912.17
The modified CSAR Kitson-Meyer locomotive survived longer. In 1912, when it was assimilated into the South African Railways (SAR), it was renumbered to 1600 and reclassified to Class KM. It remained in SAR service until 1918 and was used on the Reef for its entire service life, being stationed at Germiston. It was sold to the Transvaal Collieries upon withdrawal from service.181920
Gallery
The main picture shows the sole Class KM 1600 as depicted on a SAR Museum playing card.
The Cape Government Railways Kitson-Meyer no 800 with works number 4197 on the cab plate
See also
Articulated locomotive numbering and classification
The 0-6-0+0-6-0 &quot;Kitson-Meyer&quot;
List of South African locomotive classes
References
Category:Steam locomotives of South Africa Category:0-6-0+0-6-0 locomotives Category:Kitson locomotives Category:Railway locomotives introduced in 1903
Meyer and Kitson-Meyer locomotives↩
