The New England Hurricane (or Great New England Hurricane or Long Island Express) of 1938 was the first major hurricane to strike New England since 1869. It killed 500-700 people and caused $6.0 billion (2004 USD) in damages.
Storm history
The storm formed as a Cape Verde-type hurricane in the eastern Atlantic Ocean. It reached Category 5 status north of the Bahamas around September 20 before turning northward. This storm was extremely unusual in that its forward speed approached 70 mph (110 km/h); this speed has an additive effect on the wind speeds in the right hand quadrant of the storm and allowed the hurricane to travel far to the north before it had a chance to weaken (much like Hurricane Wilma in 2005).
The hurricane was forecast by the U.S. National Weather Service to curve out into the Atlantic Ocean but instead continued almost due north. It made landfall in Suffolk County on Long Island, New York on September 21, 1938 as a strong Category 3 hurricane on the present-day Saffir-Simpson Hurricane Scale with a central pressure of 946 mbar (hPa) 1. It then travelled across Long Island Sound into Connecticut, Massachusetts, Vermont, and finally into Canada while still travelling at an unusually high speed.
Impact
 While hurricanes sometimes cause extensive freshwater flooding, this one did not because it did not spend much time over any one place. The majority of the damage was from storm surge and wind damage.
The right hand quadrant of the storm travelled up to the west of Narragansett Bay, causing a high storm surge to the east of Long Island. The surging water created the present-day Shinnecock Inlet by carving out a large section of barrier island separating Shinnecock Bay from the Atlantic Ocean. Winds also forced a storm surge up into the capital city of Providence, Rhode Island.
Many homes and structures along the coast were destroyed as well as many structures inland along the hurricane's path 2. The hurricane also devastated the forests of New England. Damage is estimated at $6 billion (2004 USD) 3, making it among the most costly hurricanes to strike the U.S. mainland. It is estimated that if an identical hurricane struck today it would cause $23.5 billion (2004 USD) in damage 4.
It is estimated that 600 people died in the storm in New England and up to 100 people elsewhere in the path of the storm [http://www.nhc.noaa.gov/pastdeadlyapp1.shtml?].
This hurricane is remembered locally as &quot;The Long Island Express&quot; for its unprecedented forward speed when it first made landfall on Long Island.
See also
List of notable tropical cyclones
List of notable Atlantic hurricanes
List of Category 5 Atlantic hurricanes
External links
An episode of the PBS documentary series American Experience originally aired in 2001 was dedicated to this hurricane. 5
* (1938) * * (1938) * (1938) Category:1938 Category:1938 meteorology Category:Historic weather events in the United States Category:New York City disasters
