Yonatan &quot;Yoni&quot; Chetboun (, born March 13, 1979) is an Israeli politician. He is a member of the Jewish Home party and placed 11th on its list for the 19th Knesset.1
Early life and military career
Chetboun was born in the north of Israel in the town of Nahariya to French Jewish immigrants of North African origin,2 and grew up in Netanya. He attended a Bnei Akiva yeshiva high school, before becoming a student at Yeshivat Otniel. In 1998 he began his national service, and joined the 51st Battalion of the Golani Brigade. He fought in the Second Lebanon War, seeing action at the Battle of Bint Jbeil,3 and was awarded the Chief of Staff citation.4 In the reserve service, Chetboun attained the rank of major.5 One of his posts as officer was in the Egoz Reconnaissance Unit.6 He left the IDF in 2008.
Chetboun studied at the Interdisciplinary Center Herzliya, where he gained a bachelor's degree in governance and strategy.7 In 2011 he founded the &quot;Kanaf&quot; consulting firm.
Public career
Prior to his political career, Chetboun was active in the Religion Zionist community and founded the Ra'ananim &lt;U+2013&gt; Religious Zionist Youth movement. The organization was active in strengthening Jewish Identity among Israeli youth.8 During Operation Cast Lead, Chetboun was one of the organizers of a demonstration in support of the Israel Defense Forces (IDF) and the residents of southern Israel. He was motivated by the lack of public confidence in the IDF during the Second Lebanon War in which he fought, which according to him hurt the morale of the troops.910
He joined the Jewish Home party and supported Naftali Bennett in its 2012 leadership election.11
As a requirement for entering the Knesset, Chetboun canceled his application for French citizenship.12
Positions
Chetboun said that he and the Religious Zionist public supported the idea behind the 2011 Israeli social justice protests, but believed that they had been hijacked by the extreme left. He said that the solution to the housing price problem lay in new construction in the periphery, including Israeli settlements.13 Chetboun strongly opposes Arab-Israeli military or civilian service alongside Jews, but does not oppose civil service for Arabs inside Arab communities.14
MK Chetboun is spearheading a campaign to draw community organisers together in a forum which will raise the issie of the periphery onto the national agenda. He sees the improvement of deprived neighbourhoods critical mission, where targeted investment in projects within communities, both in terms of infrastructure and education as being the best way of giving those stuck in difficult circumstances a way to improve themselves.
References
External links
Category:1979 births Category:People from Netanya Category:Interdisciplinary Center alumni Category:The Jewish Home politicians Category:Living people Category:Israeli military personnel Category:Members of the Knesset
Habayit Hayehudi: A helping hand for Francophones Le Ptit Hebdo, August 29, 2012 ↩
