Silence, also known as The Power of Silence, is a 2013 Malayalam thriller film directed by V. K. Prakash and starring Mammootty, Anoop Menon, Pallavi Purohit, Joy Mathew and Jayaprakash Kuloor.1
Plot
Arvind Chandrasekhar (Mammootty), a very successful lawyer with a track record any one would dream about, is appointed judge in the Karnataka High Court. Happily living in Bangalore with his wife Sangeetha (Pallavi Purohit) and their adorable children Arya and Aditya, the man has little to fret over. Before taking the oath, he visits his parents in Kerala. There he is harassed by threatening phone call from a wailed assailant who says he is not fit to be a judge. Arvind ignores the calls at first but things get serious when his wife and children face dangerous situations. The film narrates how he unveils the mystery with the help of his close friend Neil George (Anoop Menon), an IPS officer.
Cast
Mammootty as Arvind Chandrasekhar
Anoop Menon as Niel John
Pallavi Purohit as Sangeetha
Joy Mathew as Markos
Jayaprakash Kuloor as the priest
Aparna Nair as Liji
Basil as John
Ravi Vallathol
Raghavan
Prakash Bare
Critical reception
The film received mixed reviews upon release. Kiran Joseph JKV wrote in his review for Deccan Herald: &quot;Started off well, never even half done, this Silence fades into oblivion, silently. &quot;2 Ajin Krishna of Oneindia.in rated the film 2/5 and said, &quot;Silence fails to impress the viewers as a thriller flick, which is the basic purpose of such movies.3 Paresh C Palicha of Rediff.com rated the film 2.5/5 and said, &quot;Silence is the first attempt at serious film making from the writer-director team of Y V Rajesh and V K Prakash after low-brow comedies such as Gulumaal and Three Kings. It is notches above the previous attempts and highly watchable.&quot; However the reviewer felt that the film &quot;borrows heavily from the Richard Gere starrer, Primal Fear (1996).&quot;4
References
Category:Indian films Category:2013 films Category:2010s Malayalam-language films Category:Indian thriller films Category:2010s thriller films Category:Legal thriller films
&quot;Mammooty's Silence hits the screen today&quot;↩
&quot;A silent killer of enthusiasm&quot;↩
&quot;Silence Movie Review - Fails To Impress As A Thriller!&quot;.↩
&quot;Review: Mammootty's Silence is worth a watch&quot;↩
