Qimonda  AG (), (pronounced &quot;key-MON-da&quot;) is a memory company split out of Infineon Technologies (itself a spun-off business unit of Siemens AG) on 1 May 2006, to form at the time the second largest DRAM company worldwide, according to the industry research firm Gartner Dataquest. Headquartered in Munich, Germany, Qimonda is a 300 mm manufacturer, and is one of the top suppliers of DRAM products for the PC and server markets. Infineon still controls a 77.5% stake, which it has written down (2008). Infineon was on record as having the aim of divesting itself of this stake, with the purpose of becoming a minority stakeholder in 2009. The company has issued 42 million ADR shares, each ADR share representing one ordinary share in Qimonda.
At its height in 2007, Qimonda employed approximately 13,500 personnel worldwide, including 1,800 in R&amp;D with access to four 300 mm manufacturing sites and operating six major R&amp;D facilities, including its lead R&amp;D center in Dresden, in total covering three continents. During this time, and on into 2008/09, the price of DRAM continued to decline due to market oversupply, resulting in significant corporate financial losses throughout 2008. In October 2008 major restructuring was announced to try to reduce losses and re-align the company within the struggling DRAM sector. The restructuring saw the sale of Qimonda's interest in its largest 300mm manufacturing site (Inotera, Taiwan - a joint venture between Nanya Technology and Qimonda AG, with QAG owning 35.6% at the time of sale) to its rival, Micron Technology, for approximately $400m in cash. Additionally, CEO Kin Wah Loh announced the closure by January 2009 of the company's single remaining 200mm site in Richmond, Virginia. Other restructuring included the complete closure of the Raleigh R&amp;D facility and the termination of the back-end component and module manufacturing site in Dresden. Altogether, approximately 3000 employees would be made redundant by the changes (excluding the Micron buy-out of Inotera).
With a historical emphasis on PC and server products, the company now focused on products for graphics, mobile and consumer applications using its power-saving deep trench technology.
The company continued to lose money, and sought new investors to help keep the company afloat. The continuing fall in the spot price of commodity DRAM resulted in Qimonda&lt;U+2019&gt;s 75nm Deep Trench technology no longer being economically viable. The decision was taken in November 2008 to cease production of all commodity DRAM at their Dresden and Richmond 300mm manufacturing sites. Until this point Richmond had predominantly produced graphics DRAM, whilst Dresden manufactured commodity DRAM. This left the Dresden site&lt;U+2019&gt;s production capability severely under-utilized (although a significant proportion of the line utilization remained as technology development). All of the graphics manufacture was therefore transferred from Richmond to Dresden.
Qimonda&lt;U+2019&gt;s financial situation worsened during December and the company focused its efforts on securing additional financial support. On December 21st, 2009, Qimonda AG issed a press release stating that they had secured a financial package of &lt;U+20AC&gt;325 million for the ramp up of Buried Worldline technology. The package comprised a &lt;U+20AC&gt;150 million loan from the German state of Saxony, &lt;U+20AC&gt;100 million from an unspecified leading financial institution in Portugal, and &lt;U+20AC&gt;75 million from Infineon, Qimonda&lt;U+2019&gt;s parent company. In addition, they were provided with the opportunity to draw on &lt;U+20AC&gt;280 million in the form of a state guarantee provided by the German federal government. In return, Qimonda agreed to commit to further development of their R&amp;D and manufacturing sites in Porto, Portugal and Dresden, and to quickly ramp up their 46nm BWT to improve economies of scale at Dresden.
However on January 23rd, 2009, Qimonda AG filed for insolvency protection, stating that the promised package had not become available in time.1 2 However, subsequent media reporting of the event suggests that the agreement to the package fell apart at the last minute, and so was not available. It is reported that shortly prior to filing, Qimonda had requested a further &lt;U+20AC&gt;300 million on top of the already-agreed &lt;U+20AC&gt;325 million. The backers then refused to meet the demands.3 As a separate legal entity, Qimonda North America remained technically solvent. However, without financial support from the parent company or access to revenue from sales (which went to Qimonda AG) there were few options available to QNA. On February 3rd, 2009, QNA announced the closure of its remaining plant in Richmond, VA. This is the first known closure of an operating 300mm production fab. On February 20th, 2009, Qimonda North America filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection.
As a result of the bankruptcy filing, due to the unpaid wages, unpaid vacation balances, no severance, the unpaid severance of those who have severance agreements, and no 60 days notice of a plant closure as required by the WARN act, former workers at Qimonda LLC and Qimonda NA in Richmond, VA have decided to file a class action lawsuit against Qimonda to try and recover the unpaid wages, unpaid vacation balance, unpaid severance, and to get 60 days pay for a plant closure as required by the WARN act. The workers have been informed by legal sources that should they prevail in the lawsuit that they will be paid before unsecured creditors (eg.:vendors), but after secured creditors.
The Richmond site was only capable of manufacturing Qimonda's 75mm Deep Trench technology chips with the manufacturing equipment available there. The concurrent DRAM pricing did not make this a viable manufacturing prospect given the financial situation due to the graphics chips, which were developed by Richmond, being transferred to Dresden by Qimonda AG prior to shutting down Qimonda LLC. Because Dresden was the core DRAM development site, manufacturing equipment capable of producing their (at the time, developmental) 46nm Buried Wordline chips, with its reduced manufacturing cost benefits, was already on site. A corporate decision was taken to consolidate losses by closing the Richmond site. Richmond would not be capable of 46nm BWL manufacture without substantial new equipment investment, requiring money that Qimonda did not have. Qimonda AG, however, moved the 75nm video DRAM processes, which commanded a price premium over commodity PC DRAM products, from Richmond to Dresden in the months prior to shutting down Richmond. Transferring the graphics chips process away from Richmond made the situation at Qimonda LLC intractable.
The Dresden site plods ahead with 46nm Buried Wordline development and produced the first working samples at the beginning of February 2009. It is hoped that the improved technological and cost advantages of the BWL technology will attract new investors or business partners before insolvency cover ends on March 31st, 2009.
On March 13th 2009, following a creditors meeting, Qimonda announced that it was to cease DRAM production in Dresden as of the end of March - the end of the provisional insolvency period. The company together with the administrator had been searching for fresh capital, but it was not possible to finalise a deal by the end of March. The 300mm Dresden plant will be idled until such time as its future has been decided.
Meaning of Qimonda
&quot;Qimonda&quot; is an invented name, which falls into the &quot;evocative&quot; class by branding agencies. These names are designed to evoke the qualities of the product or company rather than explain the actual goods or services the company supplies. Along with the new name, the company supplies an explanation of it's meaning: &quot;The name and brand identity of Qimonda express the philosophy and personality of the company, illustrating its vision and values. The word &lt;U+201C&gt;Qimonda&lt;U+201D&gt; carries different meanings and allows associations in different languages. In Chinese, &lt;U+201C&gt;Qi&lt;U+201D&gt;, pronounced as &quot;ch-ee', stands for breathing and flowing energy, while &lt;U+201C&gt;monda&lt;U+201D&gt; denotes &lt;U+201C&gt;world&lt;U+201D&gt; in Latin-based languages. &quot;Qi&quot;, when pronounced as a hard &quot;k&quot;, suggests &lt;U+201C&gt;key to the world&lt;U+201D&gt;, a positive connotation.&quot;
Achievements and developments
Qimonda was among the first DRAM suppliers to transition a substantial portion of the manufacturing to 300 mm technology. Approximately 2/3 of the DRAM bits shipped were manufactured using 300 mm wafers by February 2007. . All 200mm manufacturing ended by January 2009.
On September 18th, 2006 Qimonda AG along with Nanya Technology Corporation announced the successful qualification of the 75nm DRAM trench technology. Process structures of 75nm further reduce chip size compared to the previous 90nm technology thereby increasing potential chip output per wafer by about 40 percent 1.
On September 16th, 2008 Qimonda North America (QNA) announced that no funding would be issued for merit increases or promotions as part of the year-end appraisal process in order to reduce costs.
On October 13th 2008, Qimonda North America announced that it was closing its 200 mm wafer fabrication plant in Richmond, VA, resulting in the loss of 1200 jobs.
On October 27th, 2008 Qimonda North America (QNA) announced that the approved incentive payments due to be paid to employees that month had been postponed until January 16th, 2009, for Richmond employees and February 13th, 2009, for QNA-direct employees.
On October 28th, 2008 Qimonda AG achieved the lowest share price of USD 0.19 on NYSE.
On November 1st, 2007 Qimonda AG announced shipment of first GDDR5 samples 2.
On November 24th, 2008 Qimonda AG achieved the lowest share price of USD 0.05 on NYSE.
In December, 2008 Qimonda North America announced mandatory unpaid leave for all employees at its Richmond site amounting to a 10% salary reduction for exempt staff and approximately 15% reduction for non-exempt employees. The mandatory unpaid leave was expected to last until the beginning of April 2009.
On January 23, 2009 Qimonda AG filed for insolvency (similar to Chapter 11 bankruptcy in US courts). The company also published its yearly accounts, which had been delayed several times from its normal release date at the end of October 2008. This showed a drop in net sales to &lt;U+20AC&gt;1.79 billion, down from the previous year's filing of &lt;U+20AC&gt;3.61 billion.
In the days after the announcement general DRAM spot market prices increased by a peak of 26% from their lowest recorded levels in January. However, within a month of the announcement they had returned to their previous level.
On February 3rd, 2009 Qimonda North America announced the closure by April of its remaining 300mm wafer fabrication plant in Richmond, VA. Over the next two months, 1500 employees would be laid off without severance pay. Five hundred employees were made redundant within 24 hours of the announcement. A further 500 will be made redundant over the coming month. The remainder will be made redundant as the plant equipment is sold or mothballed by the beginning of April.
On the same day, Qimonda AG announced the first 46nm working production chips using its Buried Wordline technology, fabricated at its Dresden 300mm plant.
On February 20th, 2009, Qimonda North America and Qimonda Richmond LLC files for Chaper 11 bankruptcy protection in Delaware.
Bankruptcy and Litigation
Qimonda AG Qimonda AG and Qimonda Dresden OHG filed for insolvency protection on January 23rd, 2009. They requested the insolvency protection be backdated to January 1st, 2009. The Munich court appointed Dr. Michael Jaffe as administrator. Dr. Jaffe is a lawyer who specializes in insolvency and restructuring. His most famous previous case was his handling of the collapse of the KirchMedia group. In a press release, CEO Kin Wah Loh stated, &lt;U+201C&gt;German insolvency laws offers the opportunity to accelerate the restructuring process that has already been started in order to reposition the company back onto a solid base&lt;U+201D&gt;. Under German law, the operating costs (including salaries) are underwritten by the government for three months. This means that Qimonda has until March 31st, 2009 to secure a solution to its current insolvency issues.
Qimonda North America On or about Feb 7, 2009, a laid-off Qimonda employee began legal proceedings against QNA for recompense for two months' worth of pay and benefits in a federal class-action lawsuit. The suit alleges that employees were not given their 60-day written notice of termination or 60 days' severance pay required under the federal Worker Adjustment and Retraining Notification (WARN)act.3. Qimonda argues that the &lt;U+201C&gt;faltering company&lt;U+201D&gt; exemption under WARN applies, which allows the company to fail to give notice where such advance notice may inhibit the company&lt;U+2019&gt;s ability to find capital or business with which to continue operating. Since then, several class action lawsuits along similar themes have been reported in the press.
On February 18th, 2009, (two days before filing for bankruptcy) the Richmond Times-Dispatch posted an article stating that QNA CFO Miriam Martinez sent out notices to previously laid-off employees informing them that Qimonda North America and Qimonda Richmond were now not in a financial position to honor its severance agreements to those affected employees from the (previous) 200mm line closure announced in October 2008. 4
Qimonda North America Corp. and Qimonda Richmond LLC filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection on February 20th, 2009 in the U.S. Bankruptcy Court in Delaware. In their filing, the company lists more than $1 billion in assets and liabilities each, and estimated between 10,000 &lt;U+2013&gt; 25,000 creditors. The files&lt;U+2019&gt; listing of top 30 creditors shows a total of over $54.2 million owed to traders. QNA CFO Miriam Martinez issued a statement announcing that under the conditions of the bankruptcy filing, all those employees made redundant by the company on or before the date of bankruptcy could no longer be paid any credit due without court authority. This meant that QNA employees who had not already been paid severance would no longer receive any salary, unused vacation time or severance owed to them. This affected the majority of the workforce. Employees due costs under visa regulations would also receive no compensation.
Those employees remaining with the company from February 20th onwards would only receive pay and benefits from that day forward, up to a maximum of $10,950. Therefore, no payment would be made to those employees for the work performed between February 7th and February 20th.4 5 6.
Alliances
Qimonda's strategic alliance with Nanya Technology Corporation (e.g. the joint-venture Inotera) ended shortly before the buy-out by rival chip-maker Micron Technology when Nanya declined the offer of joint development of Qimonda's Buried Wordline technology. Inotera will continue to supply DRAM to Qimonda until approximately mid-2009. Qimonda has other strategic alliances with China-Singapore Suzhou Industrial Park Venture Co., Ltd., SMIC, Winbond Electronics Corporation, IBM, Altis, AMD (for ATI graphics products), Toppan Photomasks, Spansion, and Sandisk.
Products
Computing DRAM
Graphics RAM
Consumer DRAM
Mobile-RAM
Flash Memory
Qimonda is primarily reliant on its Deep Trench technology in comparison to the stack capacitor systems of its rival manufacturers. Deep Trench has the benefit of a theoretically smaller footprint than its stack capacitor rival. With approximately one-third lower power consumption due to lower leakage currents, its natural advantages lie in mobile and laptop applications where power supply is a limiting factor. Although offering significant advantages, deep trench technology is technically difficult to manufacture and has led to slippage of Qimonda's technology shrink roadmap in comparison to many of its rivals in recent years.
In 2008, Qimonda announced the development of its Buried Wordline Technology. Retaining many of the advantages of Deep Trench technology, in theory it simplifies the manufacturing process and once again provides Qimonda with a competitive technology shrink roadmap.
Production sites
Germany
Vila do Conde, Portugal. This factory was for some years (up to 2007) the biggest Portuguese exporter 7. It was also claimed that it accounted for 5% of Portugal's GNP 8 9, although since Portugal's GNP is 232 billion Dollars (2007 estimate) 10 and Qimonda's global annual turnover is only 3810 millions of Euros) 11 this is obviously an exaggeration.
Richmond, VA, USA. [Note: Has ceased operations &amp; will close on April 1 2009]
Senai, Johore, MALAYSIA.
Competitors
Hynix
Micron Technology
Samsung
Elpida Memory
Numonyx
Notes
External links
Qimonda website
Qimonda stock on NYSE
Nintendo Wii game console uses Qimonda GDDR3 graphics RAM
Microsoft Xbox 360 game console uses Qimonda graphics RAM
de:Qimonda fr:Qimonda ko:&lt;U+D0A4&gt;&lt;U+BAAC&gt;&lt;U+B2E4&gt; it:Qimonda nl:Qimonda ja:&lt;U+30AD&gt;&lt;U+30DE&gt;&lt;U+30F3&gt;&lt;U+30C0&gt; ru:Qimonda su:Qimonda zh:&lt;U+5947&gt;&lt;U+5922&gt;&lt;U+9054&gt;
Category:Companies of Germany Category:Technology companies Category:Semiconductor companies Category:Computer memory companies Category:Companies established in 2006
http://www.tagesschau.de/wirtschaft/qimonda122.html↩
http://www.manufacturing.net/article.aspx?id=182586↩
http://www.eetimes.com/news/semi/showArticle.jhtml?articleID=212902106↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
