St Mark Coptic Orthodox Church (Coptic:  // transliteration: ti.eklyseya en.remenkimi en.orthodoxos ente fi.ethowab Markos) is the oldest Coptic Orthodox church that was established in Los Angeles and is one of the oldest Coptic parishes in the United States. It is one of over 200 Coptic Orthodox Churches in the US.12
History of the Church
St. Mark's Coptic Orthodox Church of Los Angeles was founded as the second Coptic parish in the United States, and was incorporated by 1970 with only 200 families at the time.3 The Coptic families in Los Angeles started settling from around the late 60's when the late Father Bishoy Kamel was commissioned to serve the church in 1969,4 during Pope Cyril VI's papacy. Fr. Bishoy was a promiment Copt, being considered a modern-day saint within the Church. As a matter of fact, Fr. Bishoy Kamel helped found St. Mark's Church in LA, as well as several other parishes and buildings throughout Egypt, the United States, Europe and Australia.5
The congregation initially used a Syriac Orthodox building to accommodate for liturgies. Then, the congregation eventually purchased the current building which was previously used by the Russian Orthodox.6 Several years later, in 1995, the Coptic Orthodox Diocese of Los Angeles, Southern California and Hawaii was founded. HH Pope Shenouda III, the current Pope of Alexandria, enthroned HG Serapion as Bishop for the diocese, which includes St. Mark's Church as well as several other diocese churches. There are currently about 650 Coptic families served by St. Mark's Church7 with several others belonging to different church congregations throughout California.8
See also
Coptic Orthodox Church
Seat of the Coptic Orthodox Pope of Alexandria
Coptic architecture
Coptic Cairo
Coptic Orthodox Church in North America
References
External links
The official website of St. Mark Coptic Orthodox Church
Category:Coptic Orthodox churches in California Category:Churches in Los Angeles, California Category:Religious organizations established in 1970 Category:Oriental Orthodox congregations established in the 20th century
&quot;Coptic Church Urges Thorough Investigation In Murder of Jersey City Family&quot;. Coptic Church Network, January 20, 2005. Accessed August 11, 2008.↩
CNEWA:The Coptic Orthodox Church (Retrieved 17-07-2008)↩
Church Data↩
The History of Copts in North America (Retrieved 08-06-2008)↩
The life of Fr. Bishoy Kamel (Retrieved 06-08-2008)↩
Fr. Bishoy Kamel (Retrieved 06-08-2008)↩
