Cinderella is a fictional character and is the main protagonist from Disney's twelth animated film Cinderella (1950) and its two sequels. In the original film she is voiced by the late Ilene Woods. The Disney version of the character was based on the French version of the tale by Charles Perrault, written in 1634 in the book Histoires ou Contes du Temps Pass&lt;U+00E9&gt;.1 She is an official member of the Disney Princesses and is the second. She is also the leader and most well-known of them all.
Profile
Physical Appearance
Cinderella is a beautiful young woman in around her late teens with honey- blond hair as seen in the film, but her most known hair color is yellow, however. She also has light blue eyes, rosy pink lips, and small feet.
Personality
Cinderella is made a servant in her own home and is constantly derided by her evil stepmother Lady Tremaine and two stepsisters. Although she is shy and romantic, she maintains hope through her dreams and always waits for her prince to come. She is hopeful to the idea that someday her wishes of happiness will come true. When her evil stepsisters and stepmother prevent her from going to the ball, she is unhappy and fears that her dreams will never come true. However, her Fairy Godmother appears and restores hope. In her childhood, she hardly went to play with other children because of her dreams about the Prince. She adores the mice and birds as her friends.
Cinderella is strong-willed and determined; when the invitation to the royal ball arrives, she does everything she can to persuade her stepmother that she has every right to attend. She is presented in the film as a sympathetic heroine; well-meaning, hard-working, and positive.
In Cinderella III: A Twist in Time, her determination is put to the test as she goes through all odds to prove to her Prince that she's his true love. In this film she's seen in a very empowering role and finally learns that if you want a dream to come true, you have to help make it come true.
Attire
In the beginning of the film, Cinderella wears a blue nightdress and then later changes into her servant clothes which is a dark brown bodice with a brown skirt, a long sleeved light aqua shirt, black ballet flats, and a white apron with a small rip on the left side of the hem. She ties her hair into a low ponytail with a blue hair ribbon. Later she wears the ball gown that her friends make. It is pink with white lace held up with light pink bows and sashes, a light pink ribbon tied at the waist also lifted to the bodice to create a bow at the neckline and short, white oval-shaped sleeves. She also has pink heels, a turquoise bead necklace and a white hair ribbon tied in a bow. When her fairy godmother turns her rags into a new ball gown, it becomes a shimmering light blue ball gown with pale blue decors, including flaps at the waistline and short, oval-shaped sleeves. As well as her gown, Cinderella wears opera-length pale blue gloves, a pale blue headband, white earrings. a black velvet choker, and, of course, her pale blue glass slippers with pink hearts on each one. At the end of the movie, Cinderella is shown wearing a white wedding gown, a white tiara with a capped veil, short white gloves, a white choker, and her glass slippers once again, at her marriage to the prince. In the first sequel, Cinderella wears various outfits. At the beginning of Aim To Please, she wears a pink and white dress with a pink headband, white earrings, black choker, and pale pink gloves, during her arrival to Prince Charming's castle. It is the same as her signature ball gown, but slightly different. When she is one of Prudence's servants, she is forced to wear a pink ball gown trimmed with light pink lace and ribbons, along with cream long gloves and a beaded headress. When out of the pink gown and in regular clothes, Cinderella wears her servant clothes from the first film, but they are different in color. The bodice is navy blue and the skirt is blue, as the sleeves are light blue. Her hair ribbon is also a darker shade of blue. At the banquet, she is wearing a saje green and sea-green gown with a black choker with three teardrop-shaped turquoise beads nging from it, white gloves, a sea-green headband, saje earrings and ballroom shoes. Later, she is crowned by the king with a black tiara with aquamarines and amethysts encrusted into it. In the second sequel, at the beginning of the movie, Cinderella wears a tan and cream peasant dress with brown slippers. Her original wedding gown is torn, but near the end of the movie she is dressed in a stunning, full-skirted white wedding gown trimmed with bows and ribbons with a tiara and puffy veil, white heels, necklace, and earrings, courtesy of her fairy godmother.
Development
As done with other Disney films, Walt Disney hired actress Helene Stanley to perform the live-action reference for Cinderella. She later did the same kind of work for the characters of Princess Aurora in Sleeping Beauty and Anita Radcliff in 101 Dalmatians.
According to Christopher Finch, author of The Art of Walt Disney: Disney insisted that all scenes involving human characters should be shot first in live-action to determine that they would work before the expensive business of animation was permitted to start. The animators did not like this way of working, feeling it detracted from their ability to create character. The animators understood the necessity for this approach and in retrospect acknowledged that Disney had handled things with considerable subtlety.
Appearances
=== Cinderella ===  [ile:Cinderella rags.jpg|thumb|right|220px|Cinderella, seen as a scullery maid.]]]] Cinderella is working as a scullery maid in her own home for her cruel stepmother, Lady Tremaine, and two stepsisters, Anastasia and Drizella. Her friends are the birds and the |mice]] who live in the house as well, including Gus and Jaq. She prepares breakfast for the animals and then for her family, and then begins her regular chores. An invitation to the ball arrives at the door, and Lady Tremaine and her daughters are very excited. Cinderella wants to go, but her stepmother tells her she can but &quot;if&quot; she finishes her chores and finds something suitable to wear. Cinderella discovers an old dress which had belonged to her deceased mother and hopes to fix it so it looks nice, but she is too busy to do so. Meanwhile, the mice see shadows of Cinderella's stepsisters throwing down their old sash and beads, so Jaq and Gus quietly retrieve them. The mice use the unwanted items to fix the dress. Later, Cinderella is not done working and fears she will not go. but her friends reveal her fixed dress, and an overjoyed Cinderella thanks them. Cinderella races down the steps just in time, but her stepsisters recoznize their old items and tear the dress apart. Cinderella runs out in the garden,kneels with her face buried on a bench and weeps. Her Fairy Godmother appears to make her dreams come true by using her magic wand on objects to transform them into items such as a glittering coach, for her to go to the ball. Before Cinderella leaves, her godmother warns her that the spell will be broken at midnight. At the ball, Cinderella dances with Prince Charming and they immediately fall in love with each other. As the clock strikes close to 12, she hurries home before the spell is broken. In her haste, she leaves her glass slipper behind. Knowing there is no time to get it, she gets into her coach as it prepares to leave. Soon the spell breaks, and Cinderella is in rags once more. The only thing left of the magic is the other glass slipper. The next day, the prince announces he will marry the woman who's foot fits into the glass slipper. Lady Tremaine hears cinderella humming the same song that had played at the ball and learns that Cinderella was the girl Prince Charming fell in love with. So she locks her up so she won't have the opportunity to try on the slipper. The mice and her other animal friends help Cinderella escape and she hurries downstairs to try on the glass slipper, but it breaks before she can try it on. Cinderella reveals that she has the other one. She tries it on, making a perfect fit. She marries the Prince and waves to her animal friends as the coach rides off.
Cinderella II: Dreams Come True
Gus and Jaq set off to make a new book to narrate what happens after the ending of the previous story, by stringing three segments of stories together, making three stories: &quot;Aim to Please,&quot; &quot;Tall Tail,&quot; and &quot;An Uncommon Romance.&quot; In the first story, Cinderella and Prince Charming return home and soon a party begins. In &quot;Tall Tail&quot;, she works on planning to build up a festival. The mouse named Jaq in the previous film has transformed into a human named Sir Hugh. In the third story, called &quot;An Uncommon Romance,&quot; she helps her younger stepsister Anastasia reconcile with the baker. Towards the end of the film, she reads a book the mice have already made for her to them all.
Cinderella III: A Twist In Time
Cinderella and Prince Charming are celebrating their anniversary. Lady Tremaine, however, gets a hold of the Fairy Godmother's wand, and uses her ill-gotten powers to reverse time and to send Cinderella into the events surrounding the first film. This time, however, the story is changed when new situations arise: the slipper is modified to fit Anastasia's foot, and she is promised to Prince Charming. Cinderella, along with her mouse friends, sets out to put things right and bring her stepmother to justice once and for all with her marriage.
Other appearances
Kingdom Hearts series
appears as one of the Disney Princesses of Heart in the Kingdom Hearts series who was captured by Maleficent who destroyed her world. The main character Sora rescues Cinderella as well as the other Princesses, and she returns home, only mentioned in the sequel, Kingdom Hearts II. Her story prior to being captured takes place prominently with her homeworld, Castle of Dreams, in the prequel, Kingdom Hearts Birth by Sleep. In the Final Mix version of the game, her world is seen in the Realm of Darkness at the climax, Maleficent having destroyed it and captured Cinderella.
Kilala Princess
Cinderella appears as one of the Disney Princesses in the manga, Kilala Princess.
Disney Theme Parks
The Cinderella Castle is an attraction at Walt Disney World's Magic Kingdom and Tokyo Disneyland at the Tokyo Disney Resort. Both serve as globally-recognized icons for their respective theme parks.
References
External links
Cinderella at Disney Archives
Official Disney Princess site
es:Cenicienta (Disney) fr:Cendrillon (Disney) it:Cenerentola (Disney)
Category:Disney's Cinderella Category:Disney Princess characters Category:Kingdom Hearts characters Category:Fictional maids Category:Fictional orphans Category:Fictional characters introduced in 1950
↩
