The Battle of Muong Khoua took place between April 13 and May 18, 1953, in northern Laos during the French Indochina War. A garrison of a dozen French and 300 Laotian troops occupied a fortified outpost in the hills above the village of Muong-Khoua, across the border from Dien Bien Phu. Moung-Khoua was among the last French outposts in Northern Laos, following the decision of the French High Command to string several isolated garrisons through the region to buy time to fortify the major Laotian cities against Viet-Minh invasion.
Many of these garrisons were given orders by radio to dig in and fight the approaching Viet-Minh forces. Following the fall of a satellite strong point at Sop-Nao, the troops at Moung-Khoua, under Captain Teullier, resisted a Viet-Minh siege force for thirty-six days while supported by air-dropped supplies and air strikes. The small French force resisted several direct attacks and enduring a series of artillery bombardments. Two of the three strong points of the outpost eventually fell in the early morning of May 18, and by mid-day the French force lay defeated.
Four soldiers – two French and two Laotian – reached another French position 80 kilometres away after six days of travel through the jungle, however no one else was recovered. The resistance of the French garrison became a popular rallying cry for French troops in Indochina, as well serving as a precursor to French and Viet-Minh strategies at the Battle of Dien Bien Phu the following year.1
Prelude
Viet-Minh in Laos
In early 1953, the Viet-Minh under Vo Nguyen Giap commenced an invasion of Laos to exert additional pressure on Paris and the French forces stationed in Indochina. The long supply lines of several divisions were enabled by the work of 200,000 porters.2 In the area of Muong Khoua, it was the Viet-Minh 312th, 308th and 316th Divisions.3 The French command – headed then by Raoul Salan – ordered the series of French outposts in Northern Laos to resist the Viet-Minh invading forces for as long as possible to enable the fortification of Luang Prabang and Vientiane, the capital cities of Laos. The King of Laos, Sisavang Vong, remained in Luang Prabang, which added greater impetus to French efforts.4 The terrain of Northern Laos, and the local climate, isolated many of the outposts with night-time fog – known as crachin – thick jungle, a lack of roads and steep terrain. Each were given a certain number of days to withstand Viet-Minh forces, including Muong-Khoua which was issued its orders on April 13 to hold for fourteen days – until April 27.5
Muong-Khoua, together with its satellite outpost Sop-Nao, was under the command of Captain Teullier, with the satellite outpost being overseen by Lieutenant Gr&lt;U+00E9&gt;zy. Muong-Khoua was situated at the confluence of the rivers Nam Pak and Nam Hou, 40 miles from Dien Bien Phu, and approximately 100 miles to the south-west of the Black River in Vietnam.6 The outpost itself consisted of three separate strongholds, referred to as The Mousetrap, Pi and Alpha, situated on three hills to the west, south-south-east and south-south-west of the confluence of the Nam Hou and Nam Pak. Each were roughly 200 meters from the other, forming a triangle. The village of Muong-Khoua itself lay at the western foot of The Mousetrap, protected from the river by a large sandbank, and striding the road to Phong Saly, another French outpost 50 miles to the north.7
Sop-Nao
Sop-Nao lay 30 miles to the east of Muong-Khoua, along the path of Viet-Minh advance; roughly 20 miles south-west of Dien Bien Phu, and only a few miles from the Vietnam-Laos border, and 75 miles south of the T'ai Highlands. Gr&lt;U+00E9&gt;zy, the French Lieutenant in command of the Sop-Nao garrison, commanded a reinforced platoon. On the evening of April 3 a Viet-Mind battalion entered Laos near Dien Bien Phu and Na San and reached Sap-Nao.89
Finding themselves surrounded by the Viet-Minh, the French at Sop-Nao withstood for six days while in radio contact with Teullier at the mother-strong point. The survivors, following authorisation from the French Captain, retreated during the night of April 9/10 along a round-about route following the assumption by Gr&lt;U+00E9&gt;zy that the Viet-Minh had laid ambushes along the most direct path. The French hacked a new path through the jungle until they reached Laotian tribesmen on April 11, who warned them of Viet-Minh units following them. The French attempted to turn for Phong-Saly to the north, and met an allied convoy travelling down the Nam Hou in canoes. The two forces combined, and sailed down the river towards Muong-Khoua.10
On April 12, the convoy ran into a Viet-Minh ambush 600 yards from the Muong-Khoua strong point. Using a barrier of floating tree trunks, the Viet-Minh attacked the convoy with machine guns and mortars which destroyed the first canoe. The remaining French and Laotian troops returned fire, and with the assistance of forces from Muong-Khoua who had heard the firing, routed the Viet-Minh troops, who left 13 dead and four wounded behind. The French themselves suffered seven missing, one dead and one wounded. The remainder joined the French at Muong-Khoua, with the canoe's and the convoy's equipment incorporated into the defence. Meanwhile, the 910th Battalion of the 148th Regional Regiment of the 312th Division,11 and a heavy mortar company from the 316th Division, drew near.12
Battle
Siege
While the French troops from Sop-Nao were making their way via canoe to the mother-strong point, Teullier and his forces were noting what Fall referred to as L'asphyxie par le vide (choking-off by creating a void) – the result of a Viet-Minh presence which the French viewed as an indicator of imminent enemy attack. The local villagers no longer spoke to the French, when they had previously been communicative, and the population began leaving; both the farms and the markets were deserted.13 Referred to officially as a &quot;relatively small&quot; force,14 the 300 Chasserus Laotiens and &quot;handful&quot;15 of French NCOs and two officers were equipped with three 81mm and two 60mm mortars and two machine guns, and were ordered on April 13 to hold for fourteen days by Colonel Boucher de Cr&lt;U+00E9&gt;vecoeur, who promised air support.16
At 2300 hours that evening, April 13, mortar shells began landing on the slopes of Alpha.1718 These bombardments would take place every night, and the Viet-Minh launched their first direct assault which failed and left 22 dead. This defeat prompted a reversion to previous tactics of slowly &quot;gnawing away&quot; at the French outpost, and Giap ordered the 312th to leave some forces behind to continue a siege while the remainder of the Division moved on.19 Meanwhile overhead, French B-26s bombed Viet-Minh positions, and cargo planes dropped supplies, 'Luciole' flares, and ammunition on the French positions.20 This 'air bridge' enabled the garrison to survive, and fourteen days later on April 27 it remained intact; the French High Command dropped a Legion of Honor and several Croix de Guerres for Teullier and a number of his men respectively. Teullier and a small group left The Mousetrap to deliver the relevant decorations to Pi and Alpha, however movement between the positions was otherwise extremely difficult.21
Was was possible, however, was a small patrol through the village of Muong Khoua, which had been by now deserted. These French patrols served as an early warning system and an ambush for Viet-Minh assaults during the crachin-dominated night. This pattern continued into May. Meanwhile, French forces liberated Xieng Khouang and reached a position 40 miles from Muong Khoua.22 On May 17, the French patrol deployed to the Muong Khoua village overheard barking dogs – one of which yelped – alerting the French to an impending Viet-Minh attack. By 2300, the Viet-Minh were visible in the fog, and the patrol returned to The Mousetrap. Teullier issued an alert via radio.23
A bombardment from Soviet Russia 120mm mortars and 57mm recoilless guns and phosphorous grenades begun at 0030 on May 18. Teullier instructed radio operator Sergeant Ren&lt;U+00E9&gt; Novak to request air-dropped flares and air support, while mortar fire landed on Alpha and The Mousetrap, but not Pi, where Gr&lt;U+00E9&gt;zy was in command. Pi continued to support the other two areas of the outpost with its own mortar fire.
By 0110 hours, the western flank of Mousetrap fell to Viet-Minh bombardment. By 0130, the garrison was informed that weather conditions prevented air support, and by 0230 the Viet-Minh forces launched successive assault waves which overran Teullier and his men, including attacks which flanked the position using the nearby sandbanks. At the same time, Alpha was overran by Viet-Minh forces, and by 0350 no more firing was heard on The Mousetrap.24 Alpha survived the remainder of the night, and was seen fighting by French aircraft at 0900 later that morning.25 C-47 transport craft returned to resume supply drops, however by 1200 the Tricolor and the Laos flag had been removed from Pi{{'}}s command bunker.26
Survivors
On May 22, four days after the fall of the Muong-Khoua garrison, French Sergeant Novak, the garrison radio operator, and two Laotian soldiers reached the only remaining French outpost in northern Laos, Phong-Saly. Fall records &quot;he was only twenty-five years old, but he looked fifty; he kept on walking like an automaton to the centre of the post before he was stopped by come of the men staring at him as at a ghost.&quot;27 Novak and the two other soldiers had spent the four days moving through the jungle of Laos following the defeat of their unit. Two days later, Sergeant Pierre Blondeau also arrived at the outpost. His account detailed 57 hours spent hiding from the Viet-Minh, before a three day march without food or navigational aids before encountering native tribesmen who provided food and a pony, with which he reached the French forces.28
Legacy
The French High Command released an assessment of the defeat at Muong Khoua in Communique No. 14 stating &quot;During the night of May 17 to 18, the post of Muong-Khoua, which had victoriously resisted since the beginning of the Viet-Minh offensive, succumbed under the overwhelming mass of assailants.&quot;29 The Vietnamese and French media, however, had awarded considerable attention to the conflict, and newspapers world-wide had covered the battle.30 Bernard Fall made note of the significance of the battle as &quot;epic&quot; in both his 1961 Street Without Joy and the 1967 Hell in a Very Small Place.3132
The British The Times began covering the conflict on April 23, reporting the retreat from Sop Nao to Muong Khoua, however despite correctly identifying half of the Viet-Minh attacking force, it rated the garrison at the mother-strong point as numbering 1,000.33 It received scant attention during the siege,34 before the garrison fell – whereupon coverage remained positive at the thought of French survivors, and speculative on the future of the French military prescence and the new commander, Henri Navarre.35 The area of Muong Khoua later became a critical supply route across Dien Bien Phu for the Viet-Minh, and by 1963 was the site of a construction project for the proposed Route 19.36
Notes
Category:Battles and operations of the First Indochina War Category:Battles involving Vietnam Category:Battles involving France Category:Conflicts in 1953 Category:Vietnamese independence movement
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
