 Games Day is a yearly run convention sponsored by Games Workshop. It has its origins in 1975, following the indefinite shelving of another games convention scheduled for August that year and a decision by Games Workshop to fill the resulting gap by running a gaming day of their own.12 As a result, after some delays, the first Games Day was held at Seymour Hall, London on December 20, 1975.3
Following this successful start and encouraged by mainstream media coverage45, the second Games Day was held at a different venue, Chelsea Town Hall, London, on February 12, 1977 - somewhat delayed again owing to the logistics of running a rapidly expanding business - followed rapidly by a separate &quot;D&amp;D Day&quot; at Fulham Town Hall on March 12; this being their core funding stream at that time.
Nowadays, much like the Grand Tournament, it is an event that enthusiasts of Games Workshop's three main games (Warhammer 40,000, Warhammer, Lord of the Rings) can attend and play games. The event also includes presentations by special guests from the Games Workshop head office in Nottingham.
The dealer's area includes products from Citadel Miniatures, and commonly have displays of armies for all the systems scheduled for release in the next month or two.
The Golden Demon painting competition is held during Games Days. Typically, other competitions of varying degrees of seriousness are also run such as the Scrap Demon competition. Competitors in this event are supplied with plastic sprues and are expected to make a model based on a category given.
The United Kingdom event has been held regularly at the National Exhibition Centre, Birmingham.
Within the US, Games Days are held at Los Angeles, California; Baltimore, Maryland; Chicago, Illinois; and Atlanta, Georgia.
In Canada, the venue is the Queen Elizabeth Building at Exhibition Place in Toronto, Ontario.
Timeline (partial; to 1978)
Event
Date
Location
Approximate
Attendance
Notes
Games Day I
December 20, 1975
Seymour Hall, Westminster, London
Reported as &quot;Britain's largest gaming convention&quot; in The Times6, but as &quot;several hundred&quot; in Owl and Weasel #12 compared with &quot;circa 900&quot; for South London Warlords annual wargaming convention in 1975 (same issue).
Games Day II
February 12, 1977
Chelsea Town Hall, London
&quot;D&amp;D Day&quot;
March 12, 1977
Fulham Town Hall, London
&quot;est. 200&quot;7
Separate event following Games Day II, but advertised within that programme.8
Games Day III
December 17, 1977
Seymour Hall, Westminster, London
&quot;1,000+&quot;9
Games Day IV
October 28, 1978
Seymour Hall, Westminster, London
&quot;over 2,000&quot; to &quot;circa 2,500&quot;10
Stated in WD that would have ranked #2 (behind Origins) if had been held in the US.
References
External links
Official US Games Day Site
Official UK Games Day Site
Canadian Games Day
fr:Games Day
Category:Gaming conventions Category:Games Workshop
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
