Beguildy () is a small village and geographically large community in Powys, Wales.
It lies in a remote tract of countryside,  northwest of Knighton, on the B4355 road to Newtown. It lies near the headwaters of the River Teme and has an elevation of . The name means &quot;the shepherd's house&quot;, a reference to the pastoral occupation of its inhabitants.
The village has four of the five &quot;Ps&quot; identified by Country Life as essential to a successful village: a pub (the Radnorshire Arms), a post office, a place of worship and a primary school. Sadly public transport is poor but by way of compensation it does have a shop.
Community
The large, rural community of Beguildy includes the settlements of Beguildy, Felindre, Dutlas, Lloyney, Heyope and Knucklas.1 It falls in the historic county of Radnorshire.
Castle
Beguildy Castle is a Norman motte-and-bailey castle of which the well preserved 20 foot high motte and earthworks remain. The village and the castle lie on the border between England and Wales.2
Church
The church, which is mainly 14th century was restored considerably in the last century. The chancel was rebuilt in 1885 and the nave restored in 1896. The original tower collapsed in the 19th century and bells which date from 1661 and 1664, were re-hung in their present position in 1936.
The church features a 14th century octagonal font (which reputed to carry marks made by Cromwell's troops sharpening their swords), a holy water stoup at the south door, and a priests door in the south wall. The screen is a fine example of 15th century workmanship and is well preserved, bearing the original coloured Tudor Roses. Probably from the same period are two oak benches. The dug out chest, which was reputedly hewn out of a solid block of timber, is an ancient churchwarden's chest and probably dates form the 13th century. At the end of the chest is an iron ring for use when it was drawn by a horse to be buried or hidden in times of trouble. One part of the chest would have held the church valuables and the other the churchwardens treasures. Each compartment was locked separately. The church is well endowed with 20th century stained glass windows.
Associations
John Dee (Black Jack) was born in Beguildy in 1527 and served at the court of Elizabeth I, as the royal tutor in mathematics. He later became the Queen's Ambassador to Poland but is remembered as a distinguished scientist and astronomer. He was reputedly a descendant of Rhodri Mawr, King of Wales.
References
cy:Bugeildy
Category:Villages in Powys Category:Communities in Powys Category:Castles in Powys
Ordnance Survey Election Maps↩
↩
