Map of the Southern Oregon Cascade Range
Mount Thielsen, or Big Cowhorn is an extinct shield volcano in southern Oregon that has been so deeply eroded by glaciers that there is no summit crater and the upper part of the mountain is more or less a horn. Thielsen is a relatively old Cascade volcano and cone-building eruptions stopped relatively early. Damage caused during the last two or three ice ages remains visible.
Thielsen's spire-like top is hit by lightning so often that some rocks on the summit have melted into a rare mineraloid called lechatelierite, a variety of fulgurite. The mountain itself has earned the nickname &quot;the lightning rod of the Cascades.&quot;
Diamond Lake lies to the west of Mount Thielsen and beyond lies Mount Bailey, a much less eroded and younger stratovolcano. Mount Thielsen is located directly north of Crater Lake. Its sharp peak is a prominent feature of the skyline visible from Crater Lake National Park. Both of the volcanoes are part of the Oregon High Cascades, a range that sections off the stratovolcanoes of Oregon that are younger than 3.5 million years.
Climbing routes around the volcano led to tourism. In 2009, Thielsen was selected as Oregon's best hiking trail. Its skiing trails are also tourist attractions.
History and geography
The area was previously inhabited by Native Americans, who referred to the mountain as &quot;Hischokwolas&quot;.1 The volcano's current name was coined by Jon Hurlburt, a Polish explorer. The man dedicated the name to Hans Thielsen, a railroad engineer and builder known in the area.2
The Oregon High Cascades dominate the volcanoes in the area. Thielsen, along with Mount Jefferson, the Three Sisters, Broken Top, and other stratovolcanos and remnants, is part of the range.3
Geology
The volcano is composed of strata of past shield volcanoes. Its main cone is built from basaltic andesite, a common component of the Oregon Cascades shield volcanoes, and is about two cubic miles wide. Much erosion from glacial movement has led to significant deformity at the cone—its upper sector is almost completely eroded. However, this offers its contents to observation. Within the cone lava flows, pyroclastic flow deposits, and strata of tephra, or volcanic ash, are easily visible.4
Aerial view of Mount Thielsen.
Potassium argon dating of deposits in the cone suggests that Thielsen is at least 290,000 years old. Since its eruption stopped about 100,000- 250,000 years ago, its eruptive activity was somewhat limited. It can at least be sectioned into three main divisions: a period where lava flows built up its cone, one where more explosive pyroclastic eruptions took place, and the final period, in which pyroclastic and material of lava-based origin were erupted together forming a weak cone encircled by long deposits.5
On the mountain past lava flows are diverse, some being as thick as  at one sector and as thin as  at others. Stack-like figures composed of breccia and past flow deposits are as thick as . The placement of these flows suggest that they were generated by splatter emitted by fountains in the cone.6
Glaciation
Glaciers were present on the volcano until the conclusion of the Little Ice Age, at the beginning of the 20th century.7 Pleistocene glaciers have largely eroded Thielsen's caldera—leading to exposure of its contents.8
Recreation
Mount Thielsen lies within the Mount Thielsen Wilderness which is part of the Fremont-Winema National Forest. The wilderness and forest offer several activities related to the mountain such as hiking and skiing. The wilderness covers  around the volcano, featuring lakes and alpine parks.9 The forest sector contains  of the Pacific Crest National Scenic Trail, accessible from a trailhead along Oregon Highway 138.10 In 2009 the trail was selected as Oregon's best hike.11 Three skiing trails exist on the mountain, all of black diamond rating. They follow several trails through the wilderness from the bowl of the mountain.12
References
Bibliography
de:Mount Thielsen fr:Mont Thielsen
Category:Stratovolcanoes Category:Cascade Range Category:Volcanoes of Oregon Category:Mountains of Oregon Category:Douglas County, Oregon Category:Subduction volcanoes Category:Cascade Volcanoes Category:Extinct volcanoes
↩
↩
↩
Harris, pages 157-165.↩
Grubbs, page 187↩
↩
↩
