Zubir Said (also Zubir Syed) (22 July 1907 – 16 November 1987) was a Singaporean composer originally from the Minangkabau highlands of Indonesia who composed the national anthem of Singapore, &quot;Majulah Singapura&quot; (&quot;Onward Singapore&quot;). A self-taught musician, Zubir also worked as a score arranger and songwriter for Cathay-Keris Film Productions for 12 years, composing numerous songs for the company's Malay films. He is believed to have written about 1,500 songs, less than 10% of which were recorded.
It has been said that Zubir was viewed by many as a composer with a &quot;true Malay soul&quot;, as his songs &lt;U+2013&gt; traditional, yet modern and patriotic &lt;U+2013&gt; were interwoven with historical messages and Malay truisms, and that he and his Minangkabau contemporaries awoke a wave of national consciousness in the 1950s.
Biography
Early years
The eldest child in a family of three boys and five girls, Zubir Said was born on 22 July 1907 in Bukittinggi in the Minangkabau highlands of West Sumatra, Indonesia.1 His mother died when he was seven years old. He attended a Dutch school but had no interest in academic studies. His involvement with music started when he was introduced to the Solfa music system by a teacher. A primary-school classmate subsequently taught him how to make and play a flute, and in middle school, he learned to play the guitar and drums from fellow students and the keroncong group he was involved in.2
The Victoria Theatre and Concert Hall as it appeared in January 2006. Victoria Theatre was the venue for the first public performance of Zubir Said's compositions, including &quot;Majulah Singapura&quot; on 6 September 1958. The song later became independent Singapore's national anthem.
Move to Singapore
In 1928 at the age of 21, Zubir went to Singapore to make a living as a musician, taking up the suggestion of a sailor friend who had described the island as a place of &quot;glittering lights, kopi susu [coffee with milk] and butter&quot;. This was done in the face of objections from his village chieftan father, Mohamad Said bin Sanang, who believed music to be against religion. Zubir's first job was as a musician with City Opera, a bangsawan or Malay opera troupe. He became the troupe's bandleader. Thereafter, in 1936, he joined the recording company His Master's Voice. Zubir went to Java to marry Tarminah Kario Wikromo, a keroncong singer, in 1938; they returned to Zubir's home town of Bukittinggi in 1941 just before the outbreak of World War II. Coming back to Singapore in 1947, Zubir worked as a part-time photographer with the Utusan Melayu newspaper3 while composing and performing music and songs. In 1949 he took up the post of orchestra conductor at Shaw Brothers' Malay Film Production, and in 1952 he joined Cathay-Keris Film Productions as a score arranger and songwriter for the company's Malay films, including Sumpah Pontianak (Blood of Pontianak, 1958) and Chuchu Datuk Merah (Grandchildren of Datuk Merah, 1963).4 In 1957, he received his first public recognition when his songs were performed at the Victoria Theatre.567
&quot;Majulah Singapura&quot;
Singapore, then a British colony, had been conferred city status by a royal charter from King George VI in 1951. In the late 1950s, the City Council of Singapore approached Zubir to compose a song for the city to be titled &quot;Majulah Singapura&quot;, which was a motto displayed in the Victoria Theatre after it was renovated in 1958. Zubir's song, &quot;Majulah Singapura&quot; (&quot;Onward Singapore&quot;, 1956&lt;U+2013&gt;1957), was first performed by the Singapore Chamber Ensemble during the grand finale of a concert staged in the Victoria Theatre on 6 September 1958 to celebrate its official reopening. When Singapore attained self-government in 1959, the Government felt that a national anthem was needed to unite the different races in Singapore. It decided that the City Council's song, which was already popular, would serve this purpose. After some revisions were made to the song, it was adopted by the Legislative Assembly on 11 November 1959, and on 30 November the Singapore State Arms and Flag and National Anthem Ordinance 19598 was passed. This statute regulated the use and display of the State Arms and State Flag and the performance of the National Anthem. &quot;Majulah Singapura&quot; was presented to the nation on 3 December at the launch of &quot;Loyalty Week&quot;, replacing the colonial anthem &quot;God Save the Queen&quot;. After Singapore's full independence from Malaysia on 9 August 1965, &quot;Majulah Singapura&quot; was formally adopted as the Republic's national anthem. In a 1984 oral history interview, to sum up his philosophy when composing the anthem, Zubir cited the Malay proverb &quot;Di mana bumi dipijak, di situ langit dijunjung&quot; (&quot;You should hold up the sky of the land where you live&quot;).9
Zubir continued working for Cathay-Keris Film Productions until he retired in 1964, composing numerous songs for Malay films. In 1962, his songs for the movie Dang Anom won an award at the Ninth Asian Film Festival in Seoul, South Korea.10 He also gave music lessons.11
Zubir died at the age of 80 on 16 November 1987 at Joo Chiat Place in Singapore, leaving behind four daughters and a son.12
Awards
In recognition of his contributions to the State, Zubir was conferred the Sijil Kemuliaan (Certificate of Honour) on 16 March 196313 and the Bintang Bakti Masyarakat (Public Service Star) in the same year.14 In 1971, he received the Jasawan Seni (cultural medallion) award from eight Malay cultural organizations, and the Asean Cultural and Communications Award in 1987. He also received a Certificate of Commendation from the Amalgamated Union of Public Employees (AUPE) for composing the AUPE song. In 1995, Zubir was posthumously15 given a Lifetime Achievement Award by the Composers and Authors Society of Singapore (COMPASS).16
Music
Zubir is primarily remembered for composing Singapore's national anthem, &quot;Majulah Singapura&quot; (&quot;Onward Singapore&quot;). The Malay lyrics exhort Singaporeans to &quot;progress towards happiness together&quot; (&quot;Sama-sama menuju bahagia&quot;) so that their &quot;noble aspiration[s] bring Singapore success&quot; (&quot;Cita-cita kita yang mulia / Berjaya Singapura&quot;), and to &quot;unite in a new spirit&quot; (&quot;Marilah kita bersatu / Dengan semangat yang baru&quot;).
In 1956, he also submitted compositions to the Malayan &lt;U+2013&gt; later Malaysian &lt;U+2013&gt; Government for consideration for their national anthem. However, a different song, Negaraku, was selected in the end.
Zubir is also remembered for his composition &quot;Semoga Bahagia&quot; (&quot;May You Achieve Happiness&quot;) which was aimed at primary-school students, advising them to work hard for their future. It has become a Children's Day song for Singaporean children, and is thus often sung in schools on 1 October. It is also performed during the Singapore Youth Festival.
Zubir is estimated to have written about 1,500 songs, including those written for Cathay-Keris Film Productions' Malay films in the 1950s and 1960s. Less than 10% of these songs were recorded. On 22 August 2007, Zubir's family signed an agreement with Universal Music in Malaysia for the latter to manage his works. The copyright in the songs remains with his family. The idea to do so came after his third daughter, Puan Sri Dr. Rohana Zubir, a retired lecturer with the University of Malaya, met Sandy Monteiro, senior vice-president (Asean) of the Universal Music Publishing Group in 2005 through Monteiro's wife, who was a good friend of hers. Dr. Rohana was reported as saying: &quot;It is time to hand over the songs in order to revive them two decades after my father's passing. I hope to ensure that his songs continue to live in the hearts of young artists in Malaysia.&quot;17
It is said that Zubir was viewed by many as a composer with a &quot;true Malay soul&quot;, as his songs, traditional but yet modern and patriotic, were interwoven with historical messages and Malay truisms. Journalist A. Samad Ismail commented that Zubir and his Minangkabau contemporaries awoke a wave of national consciousness in the 1950s.18
Works
In Malay.
Notes
References
Further reading
Articles
In Chinese.
Books
In Malay.
External links
Photograph of Zubir Said at Felix Entertainment
Photograph of Zubir Said at the Peoples' Encyclopedia of Singapore History, Singapore Heritage Society
id:Zubir Said ms:Zubir Said
Category:Singaporean composers Category:People awarded the Bintang Bakti Masyarakat Category:People awarded the Sijil Kemuliaan Category:Minangkabau Singaporeans Category:National anthem writers Category:1907 births Category:1987 deaths
↩
↩
According to Zubir Said's third daughter Dr. Rohana Zubir, her father also travelled from village to village taking NRIC-sized photographs for the villagers: see ↩
.↩
↩
Singapore State Arms and Flag and National Anthem Ordinance 1959 (No. 70 of 1959), now the .↩
↩
↩
According to Singapore Infopedia, Zubir Said received the Public Service Star in 1962: see  This, however, cannot be right as that award was only instituted in 1963.↩
↩
↩
