The NRL Footy Show is a Logie Award winning Australian sports television programme, shown on the Nine Network and its affiliates. Following the success of the The AFL Footy Show, the Nine Network quickly developed a Footy Show for the rugby league market. The NRL Footy Show began in 1994 and was hosted by 'Fatty' aka Paul Vautin, 'Sterlo' (Peter Sterling), 'Blocker' (Steve Roach) and Ray Hadley.
The Thursday night programme was, and still is largely entertainment-based, with some football-related content included, such as previews of the weekend's fixtures and interviews with players.
On Air
Presenters
Paul Vautin (1994&lt;U+2013&gt;present)
Andrew Voss (2009&lt;U+2013&gt;present)
Former Presenters
Laurie Daley (2008)
Ray Hadley (1994&lt;U+2013&gt;1996; 1998)
Paul Harragon (2001&lt;U+2013&gt;2008)
Matthew Johns (2003&lt;U+2013&gt;2009)
Steve Roach (1994&lt;U+2013&gt;1998)
Peter Sterling (1994&lt;U+2013&gt;2006)
Scheduling
The NRL version of the show airs twice each week in the form of a:
A Thursday night programme, shown at 9.30 p.m. AEST, and
A Sunday morning programme, shown at 11:00 a.m. AEST
Thursdays
In New South Wales, Queensland, Northern Territory and Australian Capital Territory, The NRL Footy Show is aired. The alternate version (The AFL Footy Show) would then go to air later that Thursday night. The alternate show on Sunday is not aired in addition to the regularly scheduled version. The Thursday night version is more based around variety with segments, bands and a serious discussion about current issues in the game and past/future match-ups. Regular segments include: Lady Luck (with Jade Sutcliffe), Robbo P.I (Pest Incorporated), Reg Reagan, Ash and Luttsy, Silent Library plus others.
Former segments included; Anti-Ad, National Naan News (with Mahatma Cote), Daredevil Dudes, Going, Going... Gone, &quot;Crack-a-Fat, One Versus One, Their House (with Ryan Girdler) and That's Gold.
Sundays
The NRL Footy Show on Sunday is followed by The Sunday Roast.
History
1990s
Hadley and Roach did not have a good relationship with the rest of the team, and both left at the end of the 1998 season for varying reasons. Hadley had become disillusioned as a result of the confirmation that the Super League competition would take place in Australia in 1997 (see Super League War). This meant that the Footy Show would be required to give fair coverage and discussion of both the Super League and ARL competitions during its broadcast. Hadley had been a stout supporter of the more traditional ARL, believing that Super League's agenda was backed by money and greed and was not prepared to lend his support to the rival competition, thus leading to his eventual departure from the show. Hadley left at the end of 1996, and returned to the show in 1998, before leaving for good. Roach, on the other hand, had been involved in an altercation, allegedly assaulting a heckler in a Sydney pub. Channel Nine, not wanting to condone such conduct and wishing to preserve its reputation, were quick to terminate Roach's contract as a result of his actions.
For two years, Vautin and Sterling presented the show by themselves, often with guest hosts such as Phil Gould, the Johns brothers (Andrew and Matthew) and Ryan Girdler with his highly popular segment, Their House, the name a parody of the Australian TV programme Our House (a lifestyle programme).
2000s
In 2001, a contest was held to find a new co-host, via a parody of the hit show Survivor (also shown on Nine), and former Knights forward Paul Harragon, also known as 'Chief', was selected. In 2003, fellow former Knights player Matthew Johns joined as the fourth host, following the success of his appearances as alter egos Reg Reagan and Trent The Flight Steward the previous year. A new character, Randy Discotelli, based upon an American fitness instructor, was introduced in 2005.
Paul Harragon's introduction to the show brought popular segments such as 'That's Tops', which involves giving the 'thumbs up' sign with both hands simultaneously. 'That's Tops' ran from 2002 until the end of 2004. Mario Fenech also appears often as a host. In 2005 'That's Gold' was introduced, a hand gesture which involves placing an upright clenched fist on an open palm; both gestures have become popular throughout Australia and New Zealand and are often 'performed' at NRL-related sports venues across the country.
In May 2005, due to declining ratings, former host Ray Hadley was invited back to the show. However, he declined this offer due to his radio commitments on 2GB. Rebecca Wilson was also invited to be part of the show and she accepted. However, Vautin and Sterling disapproved of this move due to personal reasons, and Wilson appeared for only one episode.
The show has spawned three &quot;best of&quot; video/DVDs, a compilation CD, the Reg Reagan All of Me DVD and the single Am I Ever Gonna See The Biff Again? by Reg Reagan and the Knucklemen (Reagan is a parody of a stereotypical ocker football players from the 1970s).
For a period of ten weeks in 2005, the show was hosted by Matthew Johns, due to head injuries suffered by Vautin while filming a comedy sketch for the show. Vautin returned in September 2005.
The NRL Footy Show is more a variety show than a typical sports programme. This is evident through the many games that the members play such as Going, Going, GOOONE! and segments such as Daredevil Dudes. Only one match is previewed in significant depth, it generally being the Friday Night showcase.
In 2007, Peter Sterling decided not to return to the show so he could concentrate on commentating. The show decided to keep the three hosts (Vautin, Harragon and Johns), and have five regular panellists (two at the one time). These panellists are Mark Gasnier, Willie Mason, Andrew Johns, Benji Marshall and Luke Ricketson.
Regular guests on the show include Mario Fenech, Amanda Flynn, 'MG' (Mark Geyer) and Phil Gould.
In early 2009, it was announced that Paul Harragon had quit from the show, and that Laurey Daley has returned to Foxtel (where he first began his television career). In May 2009, Matthew Johns was sacked by the network in controversial circumstances.
Brisbane Footy Show
The Brisbane Footy Show was short-lived during the mid-1990s and was generally hosted by Chris Bombolas, Peter Jackson, Mario Fenech, Laurel Edwards and Steve Haddin. Today, the Sydney version is shown in Brisbane and Queensland. In 1999, Channel 9 attempted a failed revival.
Sunday Footy Show
The Sunday Footy Show is aired on Sundays at 11 am. Most of the time, it is hosted by Peter Sterling and a variety of panelists including Ben Ikin, Matthew Johns, Mario Fenech, Phil Gould, Jason Stevens, Paul Harragon and a variety of NRL players. Much like the AFL version, the show discusses the results of the weekend's matches so far and includes interviews with players. There is also a segment called 'Around the Grounds' which is presented by Tim Gilbert and discusses the rest of the weekend's game and injury wrap-up. There is also a 'League of League' segment showcasing previous greats of the NRL. At the end of the programme, there is a 'Brut Big Hits' segment showing three of the biggest hits in the previous round.
Immediately after the Sunday Footy Show, there is 'The Sunday Roast' where the less serious Footy Show boys go through all of the funniest footy moments of the week, as well as airing self made movies such as an adaptation of Alfred Hitchcock's Psycho.
Also making a large appearance on The Sunday Roast is 'almost football' in which close calls are shown in slo-mo for your viewing pleasure.
The Sunday Footy show is filmed on the same set as the Today Show.
Special editions
During May 2006, the town of Beaconsfield, Tasmania was rocked when news of two mine workers were trapped down a mine shaft. Miraculously, 34 year old Todd Russell and 37 year old Brant Webb escaped with aid from emergency workers. To celebrate, both the AFL and the NRL Footy Show had a special programme dedicated to the two surivours. This included a cross to Eddie McGuire who held an interview with Brant and Todd.
In 2006, to celebrate the State of Origin decider - which was to be held in Melbourne for the first time in years - the two shows were filmed in adjoining rooms, in Nine Network Melbourne's complex. On the AFL Show, Fatty went over from the NRL Show to join as a guest for a few minutes. Upon his return, a quiz was held between AFL Show regulars Billy Brownless and Sam Newman, with Matthew Johns and Peter Sterling representing the NRL side. Most of the questions were about either the Melbourne Storm for the NRL boys, since it was a celebration of Melbourne Rugby League, and the Geelong Football Club who Newman and Brownless both played for in the AFL. The AFL boys won the quiz. Also during the show, Newman showed the two boys what he thought of their 2006 Logie by destroying a (presumably) fake Logie while Fatty was on their show.
In 2006, the AFL and NRL produced a special broadcast from Germany. This was to coincide with the Socceroos FIFA World Cup campaign. It was co-hosted by Eddie McGuire and James Brayshaw. Unlike the traditional versions, the special was solely based around the Socceroos' World Cup Campaign.
Awards
At the 47th Annual Logie Awards held on May 1, 2005, the NRL version of the programme won the Most Popular Sporting Programme award. The NRL Footy Show successfully retained the award in 2006 and 2007, cementing it as the most popular Australian sports programme on television, having long surpassed its AFL rival, despite lower TV ratings compared to the AFL footy show in a larger TV market in Sydney. The AFL version has won several Logies over its existence, but has in recent times failed to match the successes of its NRL contemporary. Paul Vautin has accepted the awards in 2005, 2006 and 2007. In 2008, it lost the award to the AFL footy show, but won the 2009 award.
Criticism
The NRL Footy Show has attracted criticism for its crass, low-brow humour1 and for being seen as &quot;celebrating&quot; alcohol in sport. The programme features alcohol advertisements throughout, and alcohol advertising on the set. The show has also received its share of criticism for its lowbrow humour and poor productions values.2
International Broadcast
The programme is also shown in the UK and Ireland on Setanta Sports 1 every Thursday night at 10 p.m. and Sky Sport in New Zealand at 11:30 p.m. Thursday Live.
See also
List of Australian television series
References
External links
The Footy Show website
The Footy Show (NRL) at the National Film and Sound Archive
Category:Rugby league in Australia Category:Nine Network shows Category:Rugby league television programmes Category:Television shows set in New South Wales Category:National Rugby League
↩
The Australian newspaper, March 31, 2007 Story: &quot;The time has come to end glamourising alcohol sponsorship&quot;1↩
