Canada's Wonderland (often referred to locally as Wonderland) is a  theme park located in Vaughan, Ontario, Canada, 30 kilometres north of downtown Toronto, Ontario. It is considered one of North America's premier amusement parks, with more than 200 attractions. The park is open seasonally from May to October. While under Paramount Pictures (later bought by Viacom) ownership from 1994 until 2006, the park was known as Paramount Canada's Wonderland until it was sold to Cedar Fair and reverted to its original name. The park has also been the most attended seasonal theme park in North America for two years running (2005 and 2006).1 Park attendance in 2005 was 3.7 million people. 2 In 2006, attendance was just over 3.2 million.3
Park history
Early History
In 1972, the Taft Broadcasting Company first proposed building a 1.50 km&lt;U+00B2&gt; (330 acre) theme park in the small village of Maple, now part of Vaughan, Ontario. Several other possible locations were considered, including Niagara Falls, Ontario, Cambridge, Ontario and Milton, Ontario, but the site in Maple was finally selected because of its proximity to the City of Toronto and the 400-series of highways.
Other companies had seriously considered the Greater Toronto Area as a spot to build a theme park, including the Conklin family (whose Conklin Shows ran various midways around North America, including Toronto's C.N.E. midway) and Walt Disney who considered the area prior to his expansion plans in Florida. He eventually decided that the area would not make a suitable park site, the main reason being that the climate was too cold, thus the operating season would be too short to be sustainable.
Construction of the park was opposed on multiple fronts. Many cultural institutions in Toronto such as Ontario Place, the Royal Ontario Museum and the operators of the Canadian National Exhibition (CNE) felt that the new theme park would put them out of business because the Toronto market was not large enough to support more competition. Other groups that fought the building of Wonderland included a Vaughan residential association (called 'SAVE') who felt the increased traffic would reduce property values. Some of the concessions from the company included a landscaped berm around the park to reduce noise and the appearance of the large parking lot. Taft was concerned about opposition, going as far as to fly a group of opponents and regional councilors out to Cincinnati to show residents and town councilors the positive impact of one of their theme parks within the local community (it should be noted that up until the 1970s, amusement parks had the reputation of being poorly designed and 'unsavory'). People in the region were concerned that the new park would be similar in aesthetics to a carnival or midway.
Canada's Wonderland was also responsible for changing the master development plan for the Province of Ontario. The government wanted to increase residential and commercial development to the east of Toronto in the Regional Municipality of Durham, which includes Pickering and Oshawa, while having the lands to the north of Toronto remain agricultural (see Greenbelt (Golden Horseshoe)). Wonderland was able to convince the province to amend the planning policy for the region, and the park secured infrastructure improvements (including a highway overpass and sewage systems) to be expanded and built out to the site. These improvements paved the way for increased development throughout the region.
Concerns were also raised about the cultural implications of allowing an American theme park to open in Canada. Many felt that it would be a &quot;Trojan Horse&quot; for American culture. To offset the criticism, Taft planned to open Frontier Canada, a part of the park devoted to Canada's history. Early park maps show the area encompassing what is now Splashworks, White Water Canyon, the Paramount F/X Theatre and the southern part of Kidzville, as well as proposed attractions, including a steam passenger train. While Frontier Canada was never built, several elemental themes remain in the area. Unlike its sister parks, Kings Island and Kings Dominion, it was decided during the early planning stages that centre piece of the park would not be a replica of Paris, France's famous Eiffel Tower. Instead the parks designers chose to build a massive mountain, known as Wonder Mountain. Situated at the top of International Street, Wonder Mountain featured a huge waterfall and interior pathways which led visitors to a look-out point. Other elements which were never built include a hotel and conference centre (to have been built north of the park).
On June 13, 1979, Ontario Premier William Davis depressed the plunger on an electronic detonating device, triggering an explosion on the site. Construction on Canada&lt;U+2019&gt;s Wonderland began immediately and continued through to early 1981. Canadian companies partnered on the preliminary design and engineering of the project and helped to mould the dream into a reality.
Two years later, on May 23, 1981, Canada's Wonderland was officially opened to the public by then Premier of Ontario William Davis and Taft Broadcasting President Dudley Taft. The spectacular opening ceremony included 10,000 helium balloons, 13 parachutists, 350 white doves, and a pipe band. Four children representing the Arctic, Pacific, Atlantic, and Great Lakes regions of Canada each poured a vial of water from their home regions into the park's spectacular fountain. Hockey superstar Wayne Gretzky also appeared as a special guest, helping to raise the Canadian flag. 12,000 guests were welcomed into the park for the first time.
Recent history
The park's former connection to Hanna-Barbera productions was reduced after Paramount Pictures purchased the park. At that point the park was renamed Paramount Canada's Wonderland. After Viacom bought Paramount in 1994, a successful attempt was made to bring families back to the park by providing children with Nickelodeon cartoon characters that were familiar to a new generation. While the Nickelodeon channel (part of Viacom's MTV Networks) is not available in Canada, many of the network's shows air on YTV, making this decision logical. YTV had previously been involved in numerous projects at the park, including the 1992 direct-to-video Festival of Friends concert, raising money for Kids Help Phone.
In 2005 the park introduced Fearfest, renamed Halloween Haunt in July 2007. Halloween Haunt is a Halloween event featuring various haunted house attractions in different themed areas of the park. The park continues running many of their thrill rides during the event, but the section of the park for smaller children is closed off. Thunder Run, where patrons ride a mine car like train through a mountain, is also themed for the event. During Halloween Haunt it is called Haunted Thunder Run, and patrons ride through a darker tunnel with more strobe lights, fog machines, and black light lit scenes featuring the skeletons of miners that might have died in the mine. In 2006, the park introduced Spooktacular, a Halloween event geared towards children. The event included children's rides, costume contests and a treasure hunt. Spooktacular was open on weekends during the daytime, while Fearfest remained open at night. Due to very low attendance, Spooktacular only lasted one season.
On 14 May 2006, it was announced that Cedar Fair Entertainment Co. was interested in acquiring the five Paramount theme parks, including Canada's Wonderland. The acquisition was completed on 30 June 2006.4 As a result, in early January 2007, Cedar Fair began to drop the &quot;Paramount&quot; name from all of their former Paramount parks, and the park is currently referred to once again by its original name, &quot;Canada's Wonderland&quot;. The 2007 season marked a transition year of removing &quot;all things Paramount&quot; throughout the park. By the start of the 2008 season, the Paramount logo and similar references will be removed.
In June 2007, an accident involving a thirteen-year-old girl at a theme park in Kentucky on a ride similar to the Drop Zone at Canada's Wonderland caused Cedar Fair to close all five similar rides in its theme parks. Drop Zone at Canada's Wonderland was reopened in July 2007.
In August 2007, Cedar Fair announced that Fearfest would be renamed Halloween Haunt to remain consistent with other Cedar Fair parks. At this time Cedar Fair also announced that Spooktacular would be discontinued. In place of Spooktacular, the park extended its regular operating season until the last weekend in October. Thus, the park is open to the public during the day, and Halloween Haunt runs in the late evenings on October weekends. The park also announced its addition for 2008, a new hypercoaster called Behemoth, which will be the largest roller coaster in Canada, and will open in May 2008.5 Behemoth will also be the tallest ride in the park, reaching three feet taller than the park's ride Drop Zone.
Attractions
Today, Canada's Wonderland has over 200 attractions, including over 60 thrill rides. The park has North America's third most roller coasters with 14 in total, and North America's greatest variety. The park features eight themed areas on 330 acres (1.3 km&lt;U+00B2&gt;) of land which includes a 20 acre (81,000 m&lt;U+00B2&gt;) waterpark called Splash Works. Splash Works has over 2 million gallons (7,570 m&lt;U+00B3&gt;) of heated water, Canada's largest outdoor wave pool measuring 36,000 square feet (3,300 m&lt;U+00B2&gt;), a lazy river, and 16 water slides.
Flight Deck in action
In 1983, Canada's Wonderland added the Kingswood Music Theatre, a 15,000 seat amphitheatre that hosted many &quot;big-name&quot; concerts. After the Molson Amphitheatre opened on the grounds of Ontario Place in 1995, cultural festivals at the theatre became more prominent. Splash Works is featured in the southwest quadrant; an artificial mountain forms the park's central feature.
The park's themed areas are:
International Street
Medieval Faire
International Festival
Nickelodeon Central
Hanna-Barbera Land
Kidzville
White Water Canyon
Splash Works
Grande World Exposition of 1890
Action Zone
2007 shows
Endless Summer The Paramount Theatre stage returned to its roots and was transformed into a skating rink with a new ice show.
Twisting to the 60s, International Showplace hosted a live music show, with songs from the 1960s.
Dora's Sing-A-Long Adventure returned for the 2007 season in the Playhouse Theatre.
Sauter, High-diving and trampoline jumping show, located at Arthur's Bay.
Victoria Falls High Divers, High divers jumping from the top of Wonder Mountain, taking a plunge of over .
Water slides
Black Hole
The Plunge
Super Soaker
Body Blast
Riptide Racer
Barracuda Blaster
Whirlwinds
Splash Island Waterways
Splash Island Kiddie Slides
Roller coasters
Behemoth, set to open May, 2008
The Bat - Steel shuttle coaster with a loop and cobra roll, built by Vekoma
Behemoth - Steel sit down coaster with a 70 metre drop and travels at 125km/h; scheduled to open in 2008, built by Bolliger &amp; Mabillard
Dragon Fire - Steel double-loop, double-corkscrew with a downward helix, built by Arrow
The Fly - Wild Mouse roller coaster built by Mack Gmbh
Back Lot Stunt Coaster - (formerly Italian Job: Stunt Track) steel, powered launch, built by Premier Rides
Mighty Canadian Minebuster - Wooden coaster with modified out-and-back layout, built by Philadelphia Toboggan Company
SkyRider - steel stand-up, with one loop and a downward helix, built by Togo
Thunder Run - Steel mine train coaster with no lift, built by Mack Gmbh
Time Warp - (formerly Tomb Raider: The Ride) Steel flying roller coaster, built by Zamperla
Flight Deck - (formerly Top Gun) Steel inverted looping coaster, 5 inversions of various types, built by Vekoma
Vortex - Steel suspended coaster, built by Arrow Dynamics
Wild Beast - Wooden, modified Bearcat/Wildcat, built by Philadelphia Toboggan Company
Child-oriented roller coasters
Scooby's Gasping Ghoster Coaster - Wooden, children's coaster, double out and back layout, built by Philadelphia Toboggan Company
Silver Streak - Inverted steel family coaster, built by Vekoma
Taxi Jam - Steel children's coaster, built by Miller
6
Flat rides
Besides the large number of roller coasters it has, it also has a huge variety of flat rides, such as bumper cars, carousels, many of these relying on centrifugal forces, and other funfair rides, such as:
Psyclone - A Mondial Revolution, swinging and spinning reaching heights of over 110 feet (33.5 m)
Shockwave - A Mondial Top Scan that twist and turns on every possible axis.
Riptide (formerly Cliffhanger) - A Mondial Splashover with twin gondolas that flip and go around in the air, but you might get wet.
Klockwerks - An old classic that rotates and with the centrifugal force pushes you outward.
Sledgehammer - Spins riders on two axes and blasts you up and down distances of 85 feet (25.9 m).
Action Theatre (formerly Action F/X Theatre) - Motion based seating ride in two large theatres featuring Sponge Bob Squarepants in 3D)
Drop Tower (formerly Drop Zone) - A vertical tower-like ride that begins by slowly taking its passengers up the towards the peak of the tower and then immediately drops the passenger down until he/she reaches the ground.
7
Major attractions by year
1981 - Park Opens with:
Antique Carousel (originally built in 1928), Balloon Race (Frequent Flyers), Bayern's Curve (R), Bedrock Dock (R) moved to Carowinds, now operates as &quot;Little Bill's Cruisers&quot;, Blauer Enzian (Thunder Run), Dragon Fyre (Dragon Fire), Flintstone's Flyboys (R), Ghoster Coaster, Great Whale of China (R) moved to Carowinds, now operates as &quot;The Flying Dutchman's Revenge&quot;, Happy Landing (Swan Lake), Hot Rock Raceway (R), Klockwurker (Klockwerks), Krachenwagen, Mighty Canadian Minebuster, Wilde Beast (Wild Beast), Quixote's Kettles (Spinovator), Scooby Choo (Kidzville Station), Shiva's Fury (The Fury (R)), Sol Loco (Orbiter), Swing of Siam (Swings of the Century), Pharaoh's Eye (R), Wilde Knight Mares (Nightmares), Viking's Rage (The Rage), &amp; Zumba Flume (R)
1982 - Kings Courtyard (The Courtyard)
1983 - Kingswood Music Theatre
1984 - White Water Canyon, Smurf Forrest (R)
1985 - Sky Rider
1986 - Thunder Run (formerly &quot;Blauer Enzian&quot;, was relocated inside the mountain)
1987 - The Bat
1988 - Racing Rivers (R)
1989 - Timberwolf Falls
1990 - Jet Scream
1991 - Vortex
1992 - Splash Works
1993 - Kid's Kingdom play area (later renovated and renamed Candy Factory)
1994 - Days Of Thunder (Action Theatre)
1995 - Top Gun (Flight Deck)
1996 - Xtreme Skyflyer; SplashWorks Expansion: Wave Pool, The Pump House, Black Hole Water Slide
1997 - Drop Zone (Drop Tower), Speed City Raceway
1998 - Kidzville, James Bond - License To Thrill (feature at Action Theatre (R)), The Edge Climbing Wall (R)
1999 - The Fly; Splashworks Expansion: Super Soaker and The Plunge; Escape from Dino Island (feature at Action Theatre (R))
2000 - Cliffhanger (Riptide), Scooby-Doo's Haunted Mansion
2001 - Shockwave; Zoom Zone (new kids area) including: Silver Streak, Blast Off and Jumping Jet; 7th Portal (feature at Action FX Theatre(R))
2002 - Psyclone; Splashworks Expansion: Riptide Racer, Barracuda Blaster and Kids Sprayground
2003 - Sledge Hammer, Nickelodeon Central (replacing Bedrock)
2004 - Tomb Raider: The Ride (Time Warp)
2005 - Italian Job: Stunt Track (Back Lot Stunt Coaster)
2006 - Paramount's Hollywood Stunt Spectacular (R), The Funtastic World of Hanna-Barbara (feature at the Action Theatre (R)), Nickelodeon Celebration Parade (R)
2007 - Coasters 50s Diner, International Marketplace Buffet, &quot;Twistin to the 60s&quot; show, &quot;Endless Summer on Ice&quot; show, and Picnic Pavillion
2008 - Behemoth, which will become Canada's biggest, fastest and tallest roller coaster.
Current name in (brackets); R= Removed/Closed
Location
Canada's Wonderland is on the east side of Highway 400 between Rutherford Road (Exit 33) and Major Mackenzie Drive (Exit 35), 13 km (8 miles) north of Highway 401, 6 km (3 miles) north of Highway 407 and 64 km (41 miles) south of Barrie. It is bounded by Highway 400 to the west, Jane Street to the east, Major Mackenzie Dr. to the north and Rutherford Rd. to the south. Formerly quite isolated, it is now surrounded by housing on all sides. It has three public entrances and one entrance designated for staff, deliveries and buses. Regular transit access is provided by York Region Transit (YRT), while GO Transit, Brampton Transit, and Mississauga Transit all run special services, as does YRT from Newmarket and Markham.
Public transportation
Transportation to the park is available from the following of the regional transit organizations:
Toronto Transit Commission on behalf of York Region Transit: Toronto - Route 165 Weston Road North to York Mills Station via Wilson Station.
Mississauga Transit- Route 288, express, non-stop trip to/from Canada's Wonderland, starting/ending at Mississauga's Square One.
York Region Transit: Markham &amp; Richmond Hill: route 4 Major Mackenzie , Vaughan &amp; King: Route 20 Jane-Concord. Route 87 Langstaff-Maple also passes by the park without entering the bus loop. Until the 2007 season, YRT operated two express routes to/from Canada's Wonderland, known as the Wonderbus Routes 318 and 319, to the GO Bus Terminal in Newmarket, and the Markville Mall in Markham via YRT's Richmond Hill Centre terminal at Yonge St. and Hwy. 7. These routes were however discontinued as of summer 2007.
GO Transit: Wonderland GO Bus Service from York Mills Bus Terminal and Yorkdale Bus Terminal.
Brampton Transit: Route 66 from Bramalea City Centre.
Each of the above services provide at least one specific, seasonal routes to the park. As well, the YRT operates six year-round routes that are either diverted into or stop near the park during its operating season. The bus loop at Wonderland is located near the north-east corner of the park, and is accessed from Major MacKenzie Drive.
Trivia
A 1982 episode of The Littlest Hobo, entitled &quot;Forget Me Not&quot;, was set at the park.8
The park played host on several occasions to the now defunct City TV program Electric Circus.
Contrary to stories that circulate, no person has ever drowned in either the pool at the bottom of the waterfall, or in the fountain in the front gate area. The walkway behind Victoria Falls (as they are known) was closed due to difficulty in keeping the area up to required corporate safety standards, and the ease with which people could access the pool.
When the park first opened, guests had the ability to walk to the top of Wonder Mountain. The walkway was eventually closed to make way for the addition of Vortex, whose supports and turnaround block both the old pathway and overlook areas.
Logos
The park from its opening in 1981 was known as Canada's Wonderland. In 1994, when it was sold to Paramount Pictures (later Viacom), they changed the name of the park to include the word Paramount, something Paramount Parks did with all of its other parks in 1993. Previous to that, none of the Paramount owned parks had the Paramount prefix.
The logo was completely changed to be in the style of the Paramount Parks logo, as well as their other theme park properties, which all had the same styled logos, including the Paramount prefix, and the Paramount Pictures mountain logo.
In 2003, Viacom updated the logo of Paramount Parks, and all its theme parks, including Wonderland, to include an updated Paramount logo, even though the logo for Paramount Pictures, the film studio, remained unchanged.
In 2007, CBS Corporation, (renamed from Viacom in 2005), sold all of its theme park properties to Cedar Fair, which in turn, dropped the Paramount prefixes from all five parks, and gave the logos the Cedar Fair logo and font style.
Image:Canada's Wonderland logo.PNG|Logo used from 1981 until 1993 Image:PCW_logo.png|The logo after Paramount Pictures purchase of the park, used from 1994-2002 Image:Paramount_Canadas_Wonderland_logo.png|Slightly modified logo used from 2003-2006 Image:CanadasWonderland2007.png|Logo used since 2007 after Cedar Fair bought Paramount Parks, including this park
Alternate logos
Image:Wonderlandlogo.png|Logo used from 1981 until 1993 Image:CanadasWonderland10th.png|Logo used in 1990 to celebrate Canada's Wonderland's 10th anniversary
See also
Paramount Parks
Cedar Point
Splash Works
References
External links
Canada's Wonderland official site
Roller Coaster Database
Google Satellite Image
Cedar Fair
Canada's Wonderland's fansite
fr:Canada's Wonderland nl:Canada's Wonderland
Category:Amusement parks in Canada Category:Cedar Fair amusement parks Category:Vaughan, Ontario Category:Philadelphia Toboggan Company carousels Category:Visitor attractions in Ontario
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
New ride names courtesy 2008 Operations employee newsletter.↩
New ride names courtesy 2008 Operations employee newsletter.↩
↩
