&quot;Homer's Odyssey&quot; is the third full length episode of The Simpsons, that originally aired January 21, 1990. The episode sees Homer become a crusader for citizen safety in Springfield, as well as Homer being promoted to his current position as Nuclear Safety Inspector for the entire power plant. It was written by Jay Kogen &amp; Wallace Wolodarsky and was the first Simpsons script to be completed, although it was the third episode produced.1
Plot
The episode starts by having Bart's class going on a field trip to the Springfield Nuclear Power Plant. On the bus, Bart must sit next to Wendell, a child who has very horrible motion sickness. Bart's teacher gives him warnings about moaning about this, and Bart is told, if he makes one more outburst, he will be forced to sing in front of the class. Sherri and Terri, two schoolchildren sitting behind Bart, both kiss him, forcing him to yell out, and causing Bart to be forced to sing. When Springfield Elementary gets off the bus, Wendell proceeds to throw up.
The class enters the power plant, and are met by Smithers, who shows them a video on Nuclear Energy. After the video, Smithers takes them into a working sector, where Blinky, the three eyed fish, is seen in a stream outside of the plant. As the class is walking through the plant, they see Homer, who causes an accident by waving to Bart. Homer is then fired for the accident.
Unable to find a job, Homer sees a commercial for Duff beer. When there is no beer in the fridge, Homer breaks Bart's piggy bank, only to realize what a monster he has become. He decides to commit suicide, as he believes the family would be better off without him. He writes a final letter and begins to carry a large boulder to a lake. Meanwhile, Bart and Lisa wake up and inform Marge that they have been robbed. Later realizing Homer is gone, the family goes out to the lake, where they see Homer about to kill himself. When they all step into a street, a car almost kills them, but Homer saves them by pushing the entire family out of the way of the oncoming car. Homer realizes he cares not only for the safety of his family, but the safety of the public as well.
Homer decides he will protest to city hall to put up a stop sign at the intersection his family was almost killed at. When it successfully passes, Homer proceeds to add many other signs, &quot;Speed Bump&quot; and &quot;Sign Ahead.&quot; However, he soon grows tired of just promoting traffic safety, and tries to get Springfield to shut down the nuclear power plant.
Nervous, Mr. Burns lures Homer to his office, where he is offered a job as safety inspector at the plant, with a large pay raise included. After much hesitation, Homer agrees, and tells his growing mass of supporters he can no longer continue his crusade for public safety, urging them to carry on instead while he makes sure the plant is safe.23
Production
 Smithers was mistakenly animated with the wrong color and was made black by Gyorgi Peluci, the color stylist. David Silverman has claimed that Smithers was always intended to be &quot;Mr Burns' white sycophant,&quot;4 and the staff thought it &quot;would be a bad idea to have a black sub-servient character&quot; and so switched him to his intended color for his next episode.5 This is the episode where Homer becomes the Safety Inspector at the plant, his previous job is unclear, though he calls himself a &quot;technical supervisor&quot;. He was hired as part of &quot;Project Bootstrap,&quot; a fictional government program to bring in unskilled workers implemented by the Ford administration.
Blinky the three-eyed fish also makes a brief cameo in this episode, he later becomes of importance in &quot;Two Cars in Every Garage and Three Eyes on Every Fish&quot;. Also notable is that Marge was originally called Juliette in this script as an homage to Romeo and Juliet.6 This is also the first mention of Homer's middle initial J., a reference to Bullwinkle J. Moose.7
First appearances
This episode is the first for the characters Otto Mann, Chief Wiggum, Blinky the three-eyed Fish, Jasper Beardley (Though he does not speak until &quot;Bart the General&quot;), Sam &amp; Larry, Mr. &amp; Mrs. Winfield, Sherri and Terri, and Waylon Smithers (Though his voice is heard in &quot;Simpsons Roasting on an Open Fire&quot;)8
Cultural references
The episode title comes from the Greek epic poem Odyssey, ostensibly written by the poet Homer. Bart is forced to sing &quot;John Henry was a Steel Driving Man&quot; because he was being too loud on the bus.9
Reception
Warren Martyn and Adrian Wood, the authors of the book I Can't Believe It's a Bigger and Better Updated Unofficial Simpsons Guide stated that &quot;the story rather fizzles out at the end, but there are many good moments, especially in the power plant.&quot;10 Other reviewers said the episode was notable, but preachy.11
In its original American broadcast, &quot;Homer's Odyssey&quot; finished 28th place in the weekly ratings for the week of January 15&lt;U+2013&gt;January 21, 1989 in the Nielsen ratings. It was the highest rated show on the Fox Network that week.12
References
External links
&quot;Homer's Odyssey&quot; at The Simpsons.com
Episode capsule on &quot;Simpsons Archive&quot;
&quot;Homer's Odyssey&quot; at TV.com
cs:Homerova odysea es:Homer's Oddysey fr:Un atome de bon sens hu:Homer od&lt;U+00FC&gt;sszei&lt;U+00E1&gt;ja no:Homer's Odyssey ru:Homer's Odyssey sv:Homer's Odyssey
Category:The Simpsons episodes, season 1 Category:1990 television episodes
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
