Stephen Russell Race1 OBE (1 April 1921 – 22 June 20092) was a British composer, pianist and radio and television presenter.
Born in Lincoln, the son of a lawyer, Race learned the piano from the age of five.3 He was educated (1932&lt;U+2013&gt;37) at Lincoln School, where he formed his first jazz band, which included a young Neville Marriner, later a major figure in the world of classical music. At sixteen, he attended the Royal Academy of Music, studying composition under Harry Farjeon and William Alwyn.
Early career
He joined the Royal Air Force in 1941, and formed a jazz/dance band quintet. After World War II he began a long and productive career with the BBC, where his ready wit, musicianship and broad musical knowledge made him much sought after as a musical accompanist for panel games and magazine shows, such as Whirligig and Many a Slip. In 1949 his jazz group recorded the first British bebop records.
Presenter
From the 1950s to the 1980s he presented countless music programmes on radio and television. Additionally, in 1955, he was appointed the first Light Music Advisor to the early independent television company Associated-Rediffusion. He is probably best known as the chairman of the long-running light-hearted radio and TV panel game My Music from 1967 to 1994. He presented and wrote most of the questions for all 520 episodes broadcast. Away from music, for two years from 1970 Race co-presented (with William Hardcastle) the BBC Radio 4 &quot;drive-time&quot; news magazine PM.
Composer
As a composer, he produced a number of pieces in the classical, jazz and popular idioms. One of his better-known compositions is the short melodic piano instrumental &quot;Nicola&quot; (named after his daughter). His catchy &quot;Pied Piper&quot; (The Beeje) was also popular and reached number 29 in the charts in March 1963, but his best-known and, according to his autobiography, his most lucrative composition is his music for the Birds Eye frozen peas jingle, &quot;Sweet as the moment when the pod went pop&quot;.
His autobiography, Musician at Large, was published in 1979, and in 1988 Souvenir Press Ltd published Race's book about his Grandfather's short but interesting life, from lead miner to missionary, entitled &quot;The Two Worlds of Joseph Race&quot;
Race was survived by his second wife and daughter from his first marriage.
References
Publications
Piano-Style: A Complete Guide for the Modern Dance Band Pianist by Steve Race (sheet music – 1949)
Musician at Large by Steve Race (1979)
The King's Singers: A Self Portrait by Steve Race, Nigel Perrin and The King's Singers (1980)
My Music by Steve Race (1980)
Music Quiz by Steve Race, Weidenfeld quiz books (1983)
Dear Music Lover by Steve Race (hardcover – 1981)
External links
Steve Race – Daily Telegraph obituary
Lasting Tribute – Online obituary UK
nl:Steve Race
Category:1921 births Category:2009 deaths Category:Alumni of the Royal Academy of Music Category:Classical music radio personnel Category:English game show hosts Category:English pianists Category:English radio presenters Category:English television presenters Category:Officers of the Order of the British Empire Category:People from Lincoln, England Category:Royal Air Force personnel of World War II
↩
↩
Spencer Leigh &quot;Steve Race: Musician and broadcaster best known for his association with the programme 'My Music'&quot;, The Independent, 24 June 2009↩
