Metropolitan Manila (Filipino: Kalakhang Maynila) or the National Capital Region (NCR) (Filipino: Pambansang Punong Rehiyon) is the greater metropolitan area of the city of Manila, the national capital and largest city in the Philippines. Its residential population of 11,099,800 (2007 estimate) makes it the nineteenth most populous metropolitan area in the world and the largest in Southeast Asia. However during the daytime its population well exceeds 16 million. Metro Manila is one of the three defined metropolitan areas in the Philippines, the other being Metro Cebu and Metro Davao.
In 2005, it ranked as the 42nd richest urban agglomeration in the world with a GDP of $108 billion according to PriceWaterhouseCoopers. Metro Manila is expected to climb to the 30th spot by 2020 with a GDP of $257 billion and an annual growth rate of 5.9%.1
Geography
 Metro Manila lies in an isthmus divided by Pasig River, bounded by Manila Bay to the west and Laguna de Bay to the south-east. The city lies on a wide flood plain that is one of the biggest in the country. The area is bounded by Bulacan to the north, Rizal to the east, Laguna to the south and Cavite to the southwest.
Metro Manila is the general term for the metropolitan area that contains the city of Manila, as well as fifteen surrounding cities including Quezon City, the capital from 1948 to 1976, and the Municipality of Pateros. The name &quot;Metro Manila&quot; came about and was generally adapted in the 1980s as previously, cities which are now part of the MM area were part of the neighbouring provinces. Metro Manila is the political, economic, social, and cultural center of the Philippines, and is one of the more modern metropolises in Southeast Asia. It is much more economically developed compared to the other major cities in the country. Among locals, particularly those from central Manila and those in the surrounding provinces, Metro Manila is often simply referred to as Manila; however locals from other parts of the metropolis may see this as offensive, owing to city pride and also the fact that some cities are actually geographically closer to the neighboring provinces than to Manila itself. Metro Manila is often abbreviated as M.M.. The Metropolitan Manila Development Authority (MMDA) is a governing body which is made up of the cities and municipalities in the area, located in Makati City.
Metro Manila is the smallest of the country's administrative regions, but the most populous and the most densely populated, having a population of 9,932,560 (2000 census) in an area of only 636 square kilometers. It is also the only region without any provinces, instead being subdivided into 17 local government areas, with 16 cities and one municipality.
The Metro Manila region is built on an isthmus with Manila Bay to the west and Laguna de Bay to the south-east. It is bordered by the provinces of Bulacan to the north, Rizal to the east, and Cavite and Laguna to the south. The Pasig River runs through the cities of Manila, Makati, Mandaluyong and Pasig, bisecting the area.
The term Metro Manila should not be confused with the metro rail system of the region, and the word metro itself always describes the metropolitan area (as in the metro). The railways are called by their abbreviations, such as the LRT and the MRT, also known as Light Rail Transit and Metro Rail Transit, respectively.
On paper, Manila is the designated capital and seat of the Philippine government, but in practice, the seats of government are all around Metro Manila. The executive and administrative seat of government is located in Manila, so is the judiciary. The upper house of the legislature (Senate of the Philippines) is located in Pasay City, and the lower house (House of Representatives of the Philippines) in Quezon City.
History
Manila was first founded in June 24, 1571 by three Spanish conquistadors, led by Mart&lt;U+00ED&gt;n de Goiti, Juan de Salcedo and Miguel L&lt;U+00F3&gt;pez de Legazpi. In 1867, the Spanish Government of the Philippines founded the municipalities and territories south of the District of Morong in Nueva Ecija, north of the Province of Tondo and Imperial Manila, and isolated these from their mother province-Nueva Ecija. The Government created the Province of Manila composed of the Province of Tondo to the south and the isolated territories of Nueva Ecija to the north. The parts of Tondo were Navotas, Malabon, and Caloocan; and the parts of Nueva Ecija were Mariquina, Balintawak, Caloocan, Pasig, San Felipe Neri (presently called Makati), Las Pi&lt;U+00F1&gt;as, what had been known as Paranaque, and Muntinlupa were combined to form the Province of Manila. The capital of the Province was Intramuros, then itself called and considered to be Manila, a walled city located along the banks of Pasig River and Manila Bay in the present Manila. In 1897, while the Imperial City of Manila is being prepared for industrialization, most houses in Tondo were demolished to give way to railroad construction. One of those whose house was demolished was Andres Bonifacio, the founder of the Kataastaasan, Kagalanggalangan, Katipunan ng mga Anak ng Bayan (Supreme and Revered Union of the Children of the Nation) or KKK, a secret organization which aimed towards independence and self-governance away from the Spanish government. In 1896, the Cry of Balintawak was initiated, an event which denounces the Spanish authority by tearing their cedulas or residence tax slips. On December 30, 1896, Jose Rizal, the Philippine National Hero, was executed by the Spanish government in Bagumbayan, an execution site near Intramuros. This event led to the Filipino uprising against Spain. Likewise, The Province of Manila was the 8th and last Province to revolt against Spain paving the establishment of the Federated Philippine Republics (composed of Nueva Ecija, Pampanga, Bulacan, Tarlac, Laguna, Batangas, Cavite and Manila). The Province remained in existence until 1901, when its territory was subdivided by the Americans.
In 1901, the Philippine Assembly created the City of Manila composed of the Municipalities of Ermita, Intramuros or Imperial City of Manila, Tondo, Santa Cruz, Sta. Ana, San Nicolas, San Miguel, Paco, Port Area, Pandacan, Sampaloc, Quiapo, Binondo and others. Some Assemblymen included the municipalities of Caloocan, Marikina, Pasig, Para&lt;U+00F1&gt;aque, Malabon, Navotas, San Juan, Makati, Mandaluyong (San Felipe Neri), Las Pi&lt;U+00F1&gt;as, Muntinglupa and Taguig-Pateros to a new province named Rizal. The capital of the province was Pasig.
In 1941 as an emergency measure, President Manuel L. Quezon created the City of Greater Manila, merging the city and municipal governments of Manila, Quezon City, San Juan del Monte, Caloocan, etc. and appointing Jorge Vargas as Mayor. Existing mayors of the included cities and municipalities served as vice-mayors for their areas. This was in order to ensure Vargas, who was Quezon's principal lieutenant for administrative matters, would have a position of authority that would be recognized under international military law. There were doubts if the Japanese Imperial Army poised to occupy Manila would recognize the authorities of members of the Quezon cabinet. The City of Greater Manila was abolished by the Japanese with the formation of the Philippine Executive Commission to govern the occupied regions of the country. As an administrative concept, however, the City of Greater Manila served as a model for Metro Manila and the position of Metro Manila governor established during the Marcos administration.
In 1976, owing a great respect to the history of Manila, President Ferdinand Marcos issued Presidential Decree 824, creating the Metropolitan Manila Area. The site of the old province of Manila can no longer be used for agricultural purposes and therefore the term 'province' is not applicable. The decree seceded the 12 municipalities and 3 cities of Rizal, the municipality of Valenzuela in Bulacan, Quezon City and Manila. The Metropolitan Manila Commission is created to administer the emerging metropolis. Marcos appointed his wife Imelda Marcos as governor of Metro Manila.
In 1986, after a major government reorganization, President Corazon Aquino issued Executive Order No. 392 and changed the structure of the Metropolitan Manila Commission and renamed it to Metropolitan Manila Authority. Metro Manila Mayors chose from themselves as chair of the agency.
In 1995, through Republic Act 7924, Metro Manila Authority was reorganized and became the Metropolitan Manila Development Authority. The chair of the agency is appointed by the President and should not have a concurrent elected position such as mayor.
Geography and Climate
Metro Manila is located at 14&lt;U+00B0&gt;40' N 121&lt;U+00B0&gt;3 E. The metropolitan area lies entirely on a swampy isthmus with an average elevation of 10 metres. Manila Manila Bay lies to the west and Laguna de Bay to the south-east. It is bordered by the provinces of Bulacan to the north, Rizal to the east, Cavite to the south-west and Laguna to the south.
Metro Manila's primary waterway is the Pasig River, which bisects the isthmus. It originates in Laguna de Bay, marking the borders between Makati City and Mandaluyong City, as well as between Pasig City and Taguig, then passing through Manila before draining into Manila Bay. The river is severely polluted from municipal waste.
Manila, as with the rest of the Philippines, lies entirely within the tropics. Its proximity to the Equator means that the temperature range is very small, rarely ever going lower than 25&lt;U+00B0&gt;C and going higher than 33&lt;U+00B0&gt;C. However, humidity levels are usually very high which makes it feel much warmer. It has a distinct dry season from November to May, and a wet season from June to October, when it is constantly battered by typhoons from the Pacific Ocean.
Cities
Skyline of Ortigas Center in the foreground with Makati in the background on the left
Metro Manila is composed of sixteen cities and the Municipality of Pateros. Each is governed by a mayor who belongs to the Metro Manila Mayor's League, which is part of the Metropolitan Manila Development Authority (MMDA).
City
Population
(2000 census)
Area
(km&lt;U+00B2&gt;)
Pop. density
(per km&lt;U+00B2&gt;)
Annual Pop. Growth Rate
Per capita income
Ph_seal_ncr_caloocan.png
Caloocan City
1,177,604
53.33
22,081
.97
Ph_seal_ncr_laspinas.png
Las Pi&lt;U+00F1&gt;as City
528,011
41.54
12,710
1.04
Ph_seal_ncr_makati.png
Makati City
444,867
27.36
16,260
-.12
Ph_seal_ncr_malabon.png
Malabon City
338,855
15.76
21,501
1.13
Ph_seal_ncr_mandaluyong.png
Mandaluyong City
278,474
11.26
24,731
-.09
Ph_seal_ncr_manila.png
Manila
1,581,082
38.55
41,014
-.06
Ph_seal_ncr_marikina.png
Marikina City
391,170
33.97
11,515
.98
Ph_seal_ncr_muntinlupa.png
Muntinlupa City
379,310
46.70
8,122
1.14
Ph_seal_ncr_navotas.png
Navotas City
230,403
10.77
21,393
1.23
Ph_seal_ncr_paranaque.png
Para&lt;U+00F1&gt;aque City
449,811
47.69
9,432
.99
Ph_seal_ncr_pasay.png
Pasay City
354,908
19.00
18,679
1.43
Ph_seal_ncr_pasig.png
Pasig City
505,058
31.00
16,292
1.32
Ph_seal_ncr_quezoncity.png
Quezon City
2,173,831
161.12
13,492
.78
Ph_seal_ncr_sanjuan.png
San Juan City
117,680
5.94
19,811
.78
Ph_seal_ncr_taguig.png
Taguig City
467,375
47.88
9,761
1.09
Ph_seal_ncr_valenzuela.png
Valenzuela City
485,433
44.58
10,889
1.23
Municipality
Population
(2000 census)
Area
(km&lt;U+00B2&gt;)
Pop. density
(per km&lt;U+00B2&gt;)
Per capita income
Ph_seal_ncr_pateros.png
Pateros
57,407
2.10
27,337
1.46
Unlike other regions which are divided into provinces, Metro Manila or the National Capital Region (NCR) is divided into four nonfunctioning districts, which are grouped according to geographical basis in reference to the Pasig River. These districts were created in 1976 but have no local government and no congressional representation, in contrast to that of the provinces. These districts are used mostly for fiscal and statistical purposes.
The cities and municipalities within the NCR are grouped into the four districts as follows:
#
Alternate Name
City/Cities
1
The Capital District
Manila
2
Eastern Manila District
Mandaluyong City, Marikina City, Pasig City, Quezon City, and San Juan City
3
CAMANAVA District
Caloocan City, Malabon City, Navotas City, and Valenzuela City
4
Southern Manila District
Las Pi&lt;U+00F1&gt;as City, Makati City, Muntinlupa City, Para&lt;U+00F1&gt;aque City, Pasay City, Pateros, and Taguig City
Economy
Makati City, the central business district of Metro Manila
Business districts
Makati City is widely acknowledged as the financial capital of the country where one can find the Makati Central Business District (CBD), the Philippines' major international economic hub. Landmarks in Makati's Central Business District include Ayala Center, composed of Glorietta and Greenbelt, Ayala Museum, and Yuchengco Museum. Also in Makati is Rockwell Center, a high rise subdivision and shopping mall which was renovated from an old power plant. Most multi-national company offices and embassies in the Philippines are situated in Makati.
Ortigas Center is the second most important central business district in Metro Manila. Situated between Mandaluyong and Pasig, it is home to HQ of major Philippine companies such as San Miguel Corporation and Meralco. The Asian Development Bank also has its headquarters in Ortigas.
Also posing as a competitor for a vibrant business center are Bonifacio Global City in Taguig, Eastwood City in Quezon City, Manila Bay City Reclamation Area in the cities of Pasay, Para&lt;U+00F1&gt;aque and Las Pi&lt;U+00F1&gt;as, and Alabang Estates, Madrigal Business Park &amp; Filinvest Corporate City in Muntinlupa.
The traditional business center of the Chinese-Filipino businessmen and the country's CBD prior to the development of the Makati CBD is the Binondo District in the City of Manila.
Shopping centers
 Metro Manila currently has a large number of malls in the Philippines, the largest being the SM Mall of Asia, the third-largest mall in the world and now a well-known landmark on the shore of Manila Bay. Prior to its construction the largest was SM Megamall in Ortigas Center.
Other shopping centers in Ortigas Center include Robinson's Galleria, Shangri-La Plaza, and The Podium.
Recently opened in Pasig is a new development called Frontera Verde, which currently hosts Tiendesitas, a tiangge-style shopping center; SM Supercenter Pasig, the smallest SM mall to date; and SilverCity AutoMall, the first mall in the Philippines that is dedicated to the automotive market.
In the Central Business District of Makati, the Ayala Center hosts other malls, including Glorietta and the upscale Greenbelt shopping districts. Also in Makati is the Rockwell Center. These places are frequented by members of Metro Manila's upper classes.
Taguig City has a mall named Market!Market!, which is strategically located in a transportation hub within Fort Bonifacio Global City.
In the City of Manila, the largest malls include SM City Manila and Robinson's Place-Ermita.
Cubao is Quezon City's Central Commercial Area that hosts 5 malls that includes the ultra-modern Gateway Mall. Other malls include various SM chains in the metropolis. Aside from Cubao, there is also Eastwood City, located along Libis; SM City North EDSA, located at the junction of EDSA, West Avenue, and North Avenue; SM City Fairview, located in the Novaliches District; and TriNoMa, Ayala Land's newest mall, located in front of SM City North EDSA..
Metro Manila is also full of palengke, the Filipino-style open-air wet markets. One of these are the Central Market, located in Quiapo district of Manila, and Divisoria Market, also in Manila. Cloverleaf Market in Balintawak, Quezon City supplies most of Metro Manila's fruit and vegetable products. Navotas Port Market supplies most of Metro Manila's fish products. Other smaller markets include the markets of Cubao Farmers, Nepa-Q Mart, Mu&lt;U+00F1&gt;oz, Balingasa, Galas, Santa Mesa, Novaliches Talipapa, Baclaran, Pasay Libertad, and Pasay Cartimar, the latter also being one of the finest pet markets in the Philippines.
Midway between a mall and a market are the Philippine-only tiangges, or airconditioned markets selling goods such as clothes, shoes, accessories, computer parts, mobile phones, CDs, VCDs, MP3s, iPods, and DVDs. Among these can be found in Greenhills Shopping Center in the municipality of San Juan and St. Francis Square in Mandaluyong City.
Muntinlupa City also hosts malls like Festival Supermall,Alabang Town Center and Metropolis Star Mall, all located in Alabang. There is also a new SM SuperCenter Muntinlupa in Barangay Tunasan, which opened last November 16, 2007.
Las Pi&lt;U+00F1&gt;as also has the SM Southmall, the largest based SM Mall South of Metro Manila.
Para&lt;U+00F1&gt;aque City also has the SM Sucat and alongside Pasay City, Duty Free Philippines as the mall of the &quot;Balikbayans&quot; or &quot;back at home citizens&quot; here in Metro Manila.
Wealth extremes
 Metro Manila is a place of economic extremes. It is stated that 97% of the total GDP in the Philippines is controlled by 15% of the population, the majority of which is in the Metro Manila area. Most of the wealthy and upper-middle class in the country reside within gated communities in places such as Forbes Park and Dasmari&lt;U+00F1&gt;as Village in Makati, Loyola Heights in Quezon City, and Ayala Alabang Village in Muntinlupa City. Other wealthy families opt to live urban lifestyles and instead own large apartments and condominium units such as those in the Rockwell Center in Makati and Fort Bonifacio Global City in Taguig, while some choose to live in bayfront condos/apartments/townhouses along the stretch of Roxas Boulevard. That the area is populated by many of the wealthiest people in the country has also driven up the real estate value of the properties in these areas such that they are unmatched anywhere else.
However, practically side-by-side with the residences of Metro Manila's elite are slums and squattered areas, most of which are in the outskirts of the aforementioned gated communities, as well as areas left behind by the rapid development of the rest of Metro Manila, such as Tondo and Sampaloc in Manila, Guadalupe in Makati, some parts of Marikina, Caloocan, and Valenzuela, and most parts of Navotas.
Highway roadsides are often crowded with corrugated-steel-roofed huts and straw markets by which livelihood is obtained, in a stark contrast to the gated subdivisions present in Metro Manila. Less than 10% of the population actually live in the aforementioned neighborhoods, while the rest live in non-gated (normal) neighborhoods in regular houses, apartments, tenements and shacks. However the Macapagal-Arroyo government has started to gentrify the area, removing squatters from certain roadsides and even the national railway and replacing them with green areas.
Recreation
Located west of Metro Manila, Rizal Park is the reference point for all kilometer points in the island of Luzon and the Philippines. Rizal Park features the statue of the Philippine National Hero Jose Rizal, as well as several Philippine flags, a gigantic relief map of the Philippines, scenic Chinese gardens, and the several government offices, such as the Department of Tourism. On the seaside front of Rizal Park are numerous seafood restaurants specializing in Filipino and Asian cuisine. The National Museum of the Filipino People can be also found here. It is a complex of two Greco-Roman buildings which house ancient relics, native mummies, natural treasures and factual galleries about the Philippines and other countries. The museum also boasts a vast collection of artworks and masterpieces crafted by Filipinos which were commended by the Louvre Museum per se. Similarly, part of the museum complex is the first planetarium in Southeast Asia. Also located here is the Quirino Grandstand, which apart from the regular miting de avance (Spanish: political gatherings), is also a popular rendezvous of various religious groups, such as the charmismatic Catholic El Shaddai and popular American-based Protestant movements, such as Benny Hinn International Ministries.
Near the Rizal Park is a 400-year-old Imperial City known as Intramuros, a walled domain which was once the seat of government during the Spanish Colonial Era and Mid-American Periods. Among the attractions are the Fort Santiago, a timeworn Spanish military fortress which was also the cell for the national hero, Jose Rizal in 1896; Casa Manila, a Spanish colonial villa which is converted into a house gallery; Manila Cathedral, the official seat of the Archbishop of Manila; San Agustin Church, the oldest existing church/building in the Philippines that survived the wars and earthquakes of Manila since 1587; Intramuros Golf Club, a prime golf course outside the walls; and the Clam Shell Tent, an exhibition center of the Department of Tourism. Horse-carriages and tourist buses are also some of the attractions. The rest also includes a walk above the walls surrounding Intramuros, government offices, universities and colonial houses.
Fort Bonifacio is the location of military detachments, cemeteries, international schools, corporate headquarters and world-class dining and shopping facilities. Other local recreation areas include the Nayong Pilipino (Philippine Village) in Para&lt;U+00F1&gt;aque City, Quezon Memorial Circle and Ninoy Aquino Wildlife Center, both located in Diliman district of Quezon City, the posh Greenbelt Center, located in Makati City, the Cultural Center of the Philippines Complex and Bay City, both located in Pasay City. Meanwhile, the Paco Park, Arroceros Botanical Garden, Manila Zoo, Plaza Rajah Sulayman, Plaza Miranda, new Rizal Avenue Bargain Walkway, the all-steel Gothic Church of San Sebastian, the bars and night clubs of Ermita and Malate districts and the famous Roxas Boulevard Bay Walk which offers a fine view of the legendary Manila Bay sunset and hip-dining of Asian, Western and Filipino cuisine, are all located in Manila.
Transportation
Roadways
The metropolis has an extensive system of highways connecting the various cities and municipalities. The major roads include ten radial roads, which branch out from central Manila and five circumferential roads which form a series of concentric semi-circular arcs around downtown Manila. Most of these roads are very important transportation arteries. One is the C-4 (Circumferential Road 4), also called Epifanio de los Santos Avenue or more popularly as EDSA. It is the major thoroughfare in Metro Manila connecting five cities in Metro Manila, namely Pasay, Makati, Mandaluyong, Quezon City, and Caloocan. The MRT-3 line of Manila's metro network also divides the two sides of the road. Some other important roads are R-1 (Radial Road 1) (Roxas Boulevard and Manila-Cavite Expressway) connecting to Cavite province in the southwest; R-3 or the South Luzon Expressway (SLEX) connecting to Laguna province in the southeast; R-6 (Aurora Boulevard and Marcos Highway) connecting to Rizal province in the east; and R-8 or the North Luzon Expressway (NLEX) connecting to Bulacan province in the north. One of its newest roads, the Diosdado Macapagal Boulevard, running on the reclamation area parallel to R-1, is one of the destinations of Manila's elite.
Metro Manila is notorious for its traffic jams. A trip that should take 20 minutes will last an hour or more especially during rush hour. Consequently, the Metro Manila Development Authority (see section below) has constructed many projects to decongest traffic.
Such projects of the MMDA for motorists are the construction of flyovers (elevated roads), interchanges, loading bays for Public Utility Vehicles (PUVs), emergency bays, and U-Turn slots over various intersections and thoroughfares, and the completion of the comprehensive railway system (see below). It has also been engaged in road widening with the support of the Department of Public Works and Highways. MMDA has also utilized projects for the pedestrians such as the installation of footbridges, waiting sheds, and men's urinals to various roads in the metropolis. The agency has also implemented various schemes for motorists such as the Uniform Vehicular Volume Reduction Scheme (UVVRS), more popularly known as &quot;color coding&quot;, where vehicles whose plate numbers end in different digits are banned from traveling on different days, the Yellow Lane scheme, where yellow-plated PUBs (Public Utility Buses) will only use the two outermost lanes in EDSA, and the Organized Bus Route (OBR) for Metro Manila.
Railways
 As of 2005, there are two different rapid transit systems in Metro Manila: the Manila Light Rail Transit System, or the LRT, and the Manila Metro Rail Transit System, or the MRT. The Yellow Line (LRT-1) and the Purple Line (LRT-2) form the LRT network, while the Blue Line (MRT-3) forms the MRT network, with 29 stations on the LRT and 13 stations on the MRT . Four more lines are proposed and would connect Metro Manila to the provinces of Bulacan, Cavite, Laguna and Rizal upon their completion.
Philippine National Railways also operates two main-line railway lines within Metro Manila, all part of the once-flourishing Luzon railway system. The northern line, known as Northrail and connecting Manila to Caloocan City, is currently closed. Line extensions are proposed to Valenzuela City and further on to Bulacan and Pampanga. The trans-Metro Manila portion of the still-open southern line, known as Southrail, commences at Tutuban station in Tondo, Manila, passes through the cities of Manila, Makati, Taguig, Para&lt;U+00F1&gt;aque and Las Pi&lt;U+00F1&gt;as, and ends in Barangay Buli, Muntinlupa City, before entering the province of Laguna.
Airports
The country's main airport is the Ninoy Aquino International Airport (NAIA) which straddles the boundary between Para&lt;U+00F1&gt;aque City and Pasay City. It presently consists of two terminals, while a third one will open soon. There is also a separate domestic terminal. There are two main runways and the hangar of Philippine Airlines is located near the Villamor Air Base.
There are four airport terminals in Metro Manila, all of which are located in Para&lt;U+00F1&gt;aque City, 9 kilometers south of the City of Manila.
NAIA-1: NAIA-1 is the original terminal and was constructed in 1981. The 67,000 square meter terminal was designed by Filipino architect Leandro V. Locsin and has a design capacity of 4.5 million passengers per year. It currently serves all non-Philippine Airlines international flights. The terminal has reached capacity in 1991 and has been over capacity ever since.
NAIA-2: NAIA-2 terminal was finished in 1998 and is named the Centennial Terminal since 1998 was the centennial year of the declaration of Philippine independence. The 75,000 square meter terminal was originally designed by A&lt;U+00E9&gt;roports de Paris to be a domestic terminal, but the design was later modified to accommodate international flights. It has a capacity of 2.5 million passengers per year in its international wing and 5 million in its domestic wing, which later will expand to nine million passengers yearly. Terminal 2 is the home of Philippine Airlines and Air Philippines and is used for both its domestic and international flights since it has the most flights out of the NAIA terminals.
NAIA-3: NAIA-3 was approved for construction in 1997 and is nearly complete. The modern US$500 million, 189,000 square meter facility was designed by Skidmore, Owings and Merrill (SOM) to have a capacity of 13 million passengers per year. However, a legal dispute between the government of the Philippines and the project's main contractor, PIATCO, over alleged anomalies in the Build-Operate-Transfer (BOT) contract, is holding completion and opening of the terminal. On December 2004, the Philippine Government took over the management of the facility through an order of the Pasay City Regional Trial Court (RTC). Manila International Airport Authority is yet to announce its opening due to major repairs.
Domestic Airport: The Domestic Airport was built on 1948 on the old Airport Road. It currently handles all domestic air traffic, excluding Philippine Airlines and Air Philippines. Currently, the terminal is composed of two single-story buildings and serves the domestic local carriers, which are Cebu Pacific, Asian Spirit, Southeast Asian Airlines (Seair), Laoag International Airlines and Interisland Airlines.
Demographics
As of the census of 2000, there were 9,932,560 people and 2,132,989 households residing in Metro Manila. With a population density of 15,617/km&lt;U+00B2&gt;, it is by far the most densely populated region of the Philippines. For the period 1995 to 2000, the annual population growth rate was 1.06 percent, lower than that of the 1990 to 1995 period (3.30 percent). If the current annual population growth rate of the metropolitan area continues, the population is expected to double in 65 years.
The indigenous people of the area now known as Metro Manila were the Tagalog. There are also numerous peoples of Chinese and Japanese, Indian descent. Resident Spaniards, Americans, and Koreans are also present in large numbers. Metro Manila is classified as a social urban conglomerate, meaning, it is one of the most ethnically diverse cities in the world.
The most common language spoken in households is Tagalog (94.34%). English is widely used and understood, and is the main language of the upper classes.
The large majority of the population of Metro Manila is Roman Catholic (89%). Other religions include Protestant (3%), Islam (5%), and Hinduism and Buddhism (3%).
Education
Metro Manila is home to several noteworthy Philippine higher educational institutions. It is the educational seat of the country and many students from the provinces head onto Metro Manila to study. As such, several dormitories, apartments and boarding houses abound. Areas of high number of educational institutions include the so-called &quot;University Belt&quot; and Taft Avenue in Manila, Katipunan Avenue and Fairview in Quezon City and Sta. Mesa straddling the Manila, Quezon City and Mandaluyong City borders.
Metro Manila is also home to numerous public and private basic education institutions, science high schools, and international schools.
Every year, thousands of students from the various countries of Asia, such as China, Japan, Korea, Iran and Vietnam, and even from Europe go to the Philippines to study.
Police and security
 Police structure in the Philippines is centralized and its command center is located in Camp Rafael Crame in Santolan, Quezon City. Metro Manila is divided into 5 police districts namely Central (Quezon City), Western (City of Manila), Eastern (Mandaluyong, Pasig, Marikina, San Juan), Northern (Caloocan, Malabon, Navotas, Valenzuela) and Southern (Makati, Muntinlupa, Las Pi&lt;U+00F1&gt;as, Para&lt;U+00F1&gt;aque, Taguig and Pateros).
The Armed Forces of the Philippines' command headquarters is located in Camp Emilio Aguinaldo in Murphy, Quezon City. Metro Manila is the National Capital Region Command created by President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo to defend the metropolis from insurgents and terrorist groups. Philippine Army headquarters is located in Fort Bonifacio in Taguig City. Philippine Air Force headquarters is located in Villamor Airbase in Pasay City. Philippine Navy headquarters was once located in Roxas Boulevard in Manila until its transfer by President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo to Zamboanga City.
Public utilities
Electricity
Metro Manila's electricity is generated by the state-owned National Power Corporation (Napocor) and other independent power producers across the island of Luzon. It is transmitted by the state-owned National Transmission Corporation (TransCo) through high tension wires. It is stored and distributed by the Manila Electric Company (Meralco), the only company allowed to distribute electricity to the metropolis.
Water
 Metro Manila's tap water is sourced from the Angat Dam in Norzagaray, Bulacan. It is stored in the Novaliches Reservoir and filtered in the La Mesa Dam, both in northeast Quezon City. Metro Manila's water distribution and sewerage system used to be managed by the Metropolitan Water and Sewerage System (MWSS), a state-owned company. In 1997, MWSS awarded concessionare licenses to two private corporations. Metro Manila was sliced into two distribution areas.
Maynilad Water Services Inc. (MWSI). It is currently majority-owned by the MWSS, which took it over from Benpres Holdings Company, which also controls MERALCO. It operates in western Quezon City, southern Caloocan City, Manila (excludes Downtown), Valenzuela City, Malabon City, Navotas, Pasay City, Para&lt;U+00F1&gt;aque City, Las Pi&lt;U+00F1&gt;as City, and western Muntinlupa City. MWSS is currently bidding out its shares in MWSI and expects to conclude the bidding before the end of the year.
Manila Water Company, Inc. (MWC). It is majority-owned by the Ayala Corporation, which also controls Globe Telecom. MWC operates the East Concession Zone, which is comprised of Makati City, Mandaluyong City, Marikina City, Pasig City, Pateros, San Juan City, Taguig City, eastern Quezon City, and the southeast portions of Manila.
Communications
Since 1925, the Philippine Long Distance Telephone Company (PLDT) was the Philippines' only phone carrier. With the passage of the National Telecommunications Act of 1995, the Philippine National Telecommunications Commission (NTC) granted licenses to new and independent companies to install new phones across the Philippines. The NTC granted 3 new licenses for Metro Manila.
Bayantel/ Benpres - Northern Metro Manila (Quezon City, northern Caloocan City, Malabon City, Navotas, Valenzuela City, Marikina City, northeastern Manila, and the Ortigas Center in Pasig City)
Globelines/ Innove - Southern Metro Manila (Makati City, Mandaluyong City, Muntinlupa City, Pasay City, Las Pi&lt;U+00F1&gt;as City, Para&lt;U+00F1&gt;aque City, Taguig City, Pateros, San Juan, and Pasig City excluding the Ortigas Center)
Eastern Telecoms - Western Metro Manila (Southern Caloocan City and Manila, excluding the northeast part)
Metropolitan Manila Development Authority
The Metropolitan Manila Development Authority (MMDA) is the administrative body in charge of the metropolis' development, and solving perennial problems such as traffic management, flood control, garbage disposal and sewage maintenance. It closely coordinates with various other organizations such as the Pasig River Rehabilitation Commission (PRRC) and the Department of Public Works and Highways (DPWH), as well as the local government units of the component cities and municipalities. Its agency's head is appointed by the president, which is now presided by Chairman Bayani Fernando.
It is a member of Asian Network of Major Cities 21.
See also
Mega Manila
Metro Cebu
Imperial Manila
References
External links
Metro Manila Development Authority Get traffic advisories and information on Metro Manila traffic regulations.
bcl:Rehiyon Nasyunal na Kapitolyo br:Metro Manila de:Metro Manila es:Metro Manila ilo:Metro Manila id:Metro Manila ia:Metro Manila it:Regione Capitale Nazionale pam:Metro Manila lv:Manila nl:National Capital Region ja:&lt;U+30E1&gt;&lt;U+30C8&gt;&lt;U+30ED&gt;&lt;U+30FB&gt;&lt;U+30DE&gt;&lt;U+30CB&gt;&lt;U+30E9&gt; fi:Metro Manila sv:Metro Manila tl:Kalakhang Maynila cbk-zam:Metro Manila
  Manila Category:Regions of the Philippines
↩
