Fol Chen is an American synthpop band from Los Angeles, California,1 
They have released two full-length albums and a third album is scheduled to be released on March 19, 2013. The band is signed to the record label Asthmatic Kitty.2
Part I: John Shade, Your Fortune's Made and Part II: The New December (2009–2012)
The band &quot;maintained utmost secrecy from the start&quot;,3 working under aliases and disguising their faces during recorded shows, including KCRW radio's Morning Becomes Eclectic program4 and the 2009 South by Southwest festival.5
The cover art for their first album, Part I: John Shade, Your Fortune's Made, release in 2009, features silhouettes, and music videos replace band members with actors and animation, such as the video of the song &quot;No Wedding Cake&quot; where band members appear as animals.
In 2010, the band released Part II: The New December, described by the Los Angeles Times as &quot;screwball pastiche pop [that] sounds like an algebra problem but feels like a come-on.&quot;6 Sinosa Loa joined the group at this time as keyboardist and vocalist, although the band favored group vocals and shared lead duties among most members. They toured throughout the U.S., Canada and Europe with other American bands, including dance-punk Liars, dance-punk !!!, and indie-rock The Apples in Stereo.
During a month-long residency at The Echo nightclub in Los Angeles, the band featured different shows each night one show invited guest singers found via Craigslist to perform with the band as a sort of live karaoke;7 another night saw metal band Viscera playing exclusively Fol Chen covers.8
In November 2010, Samuel Bing and Loa traveled to Saint Petersburg, Russia, to perform two long-form, constructivist-inspired reworkings of the two studio albums, followed by a workshop and recording session where they invited local musicians (and curious non-musicians) to join them in building a new Fol Chen song.9
On July 28, 2011, the pair also held a workshop produced with the arts organization Machine Project at the Walker Art Center, a contemporary-art center in Minneapolis, Minnesota, to introduce the Fol Chen Verbal Algorithm Composer-Free Song Generator. The project allowed museum visitors to to record their experience with a piece of art and have it converted into a song that they could take home.10
The band collaborated with Monome, a computer-manufacturing company, in late 2011 to make the Tetrafol, a motion-sensitive pyramidal sound device. The Tetrafol came pre-loaded with Fol Chen samples but allowed users to apply their own sounds. The band released two singles made with the device and sold a limited run of 100 units.11
The False Alarms (2013)
The band's third album is scheduled to be released March 19, 2013, on the Asthmatic Kitty label.12 The music is in a style the band calls &quot;Opera-House&quot;, which they describe as &quot;beat-driven electronica with grand, operatic gestures and lyrically-dense storytelling.&quot;13 In a departure from their previous use of multiple lead singers, Loa performs all ten tracks.14
Members
Samuel Bing
The Booksman
Garrett Henritz
Sinosa Loa
Patrik-Ian Polk
Julian Wass
Discography
Albums
Part I: John Shade, Your Fortune's Made (2009)
Part II: The New December (2010)
The False Alarms (2013) (scheduled to be released on March 19, 2013)
Covers, remixes and collaborations
The Longer U Wait remix digital release (Asthmatic Kitty, 2009)
2009: &quot;The Beautiful Ones&quot; cover on the Prince tribute album Purplish Rain
2009: &quot;In the Flesh&quot; cover on the Pink Floyd tribute album The Wall Re-Built
2011: &quot;I Walked&quot; (Sufjan Stevens cover)
2012: &quot;Implants and Yankee Candles&quot; with Kitty Pryde
Other contributions
soundtrack for the Canadian-American romantic comedy-drama film Noah's Arc: Jumping the Broom (2008), directed by Patrik-Ian Polk
soundtrack for the short documentary film Beauty CuLTure, directed by Lauren Greenfield
an instrumental version of the band's song &quot;In Ruins&quot; was featured in the episode &quot;Unfriendly Chat&quot; (2010) of the the American police-procedural television series CSI: NY and was also featured in the episode &quot;Gentle Puppies&quot; (2010) of the American dark-comedy drama television series Weeds
Music videos
Cable TV directed by Chris Wilcha
No Wedding Cake directed by Nancy Jean Tucker
The Longer U Wait directed by Chris Wilcha
See also
List of Asthmatic Kitty artists
List of bands from Los Angeles
List of synthpop artists
Music of Los Angeles
References
External links
, the band's official website
Category:2009 establishments in California Category:21st-century musicians Category:American pop music groups Category:Electronic music groups from California Category:Musical groups established in 2009 Category:Musical groups from Los Angeles, California Category:Synthpop groups
Vallejos, Tamara (December 1, 2008). &quot;Fol Chen: 'No Wedding Cake'&quot;. NPR Music. Retrieved February 10, 2013.↩
Staff (November 11, 2008). &quot;Fol Chen&quot;. Asthmatic Kitty. Retrieved February 10, 2013.↩
Leahey, Andrew (undated). &quot;Fol Chen Biography&quot;. Allmusic. Retrieved February 10, 2013.↩
 1. KCRW.↩
Phillips, Amy (March 19, 2009). &quot;SXSW Wed: The Decemberists, Jarvis Cocker, Human Highway, Fol Chen, Ladyhawke&quot;. Pitchfork Media. Retrieved February 10, 2013.↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
 ↩
↩
