Runaway Brain is a seven-minute animated comic science fiction short-subject produced by Walt Disney Feature Animation Paris, and starring Mickey Mouse and Minnie Mouse. It was first released on April 7, 1995 attached to A Goofy Movie, and was re-released on August 11 of the same year with A Kid in King Arthur's Court, and on July 16, 1997 in front of Disney's live-action remake of George of the Jungle. It was also screened along with Disney's 1995 animated film Pocahontas. It was also released in theaters in the UK with Lilo &amp; Stitch in 2002, The short was to be re-released with 101 Dalmatians, which was sent to theaters with the short attached in 1996, but Disney asked theater owners to cut the short off all film prints to replace it with trailers for Hercules, That Darn Cat, Jungle 2 Jungle and George of the Jungle.1 In international theaters, it was shown preceding A Goofy Movie.
Plot
Minnie (voiced by Russi Taylor) visits Mickey (voiced by Wayne Allwine) while he is playing a video game and is upset to find that he has forgotten the anniversary of their first date. Mickey comes up with the last-minute idea to take her to a miniature golf course for their anniversary and shows her a newspaper ad for it, but she instead notices an ad for a trip to Hawaii, which would cost $999.99, and mistakes it for Mickey's gift. Mickey frets over how he can make enough money for the trip when Pluto (voiced by Bill Farmer) shows him an ad to work with a mad scientist named Dr. Frankenollie (voiced by Kelsey Grammer) for a day of &quot;mindless work&quot; that would pay $999.99. Upon reaching the home of the simian Dr. Frankenollie, Mickey is dropped down a trapdoor into Frankenollie's laboratory, where the doctor plans to switch Mickey's brain with that of the Frankenstein's monster-esque Julius (voiced by Jim Cummings and modeled after Pete). The experiment causes an explosion that kills Frankenollie, but the brain transfer is a success, with Mickey's mind ending up in Julius' giant body and Julius in control of Mickey's body.
The dimwitted and insane Julius finds Mickey's wallet and notices a photo of Minnie, whom he instantly becomes smitten with. He escapes from the laboratory and finds Minnie while she is shopping for swimsuits. Mickey arrives in Julius' body to save Minnie, but Minnie mistakes Mickey for a monster and screams for help until Mickey convinces her of who he is. Julius continues to pursue Minnie, leading to a battle between Mickey and Julius during which they land on a telephone line and are electrocuted, which causes their minds to switch back to their original bodies. Mickey manages to tie Julius up with a rope atop a tall building and rescue Minnie, and the two travel to Hawaii together on an inflatable boat pulled by Julius as he swims after the photo of Minnie in Mickey's wallet, which is attached to a fishing line manned by Mickey.
Cast
Wayne Allwine as Mickey Mouse
Russi Taylor as Minnie Mouse
Bill Farmer as Pluto
Kelsey Grammer as Dr. Frankenollie
Jim Cummings as the Monster
Release
The film was screened out of competition at the 1996 Cannes Film Festival.2 It was later nominated the Academy Award for Best Animated Short but lost to A Close Shave.
The short was released on DVD in the Walt Disney Treasures collection Mickey Mouse in Living Color, Vol. 2.
In other media
This cartoon was featured in the video gameDisney's Magical Mirror Starring Mickey Mouse.
Julius appears as an optional secret boss in Kingdom Hearts 3D: Dream Drop Distance in Traverse Town.
References
External links
Runaway Brain at The Encyclopedia of Disney Animated Shorts
Category:1995 films Category:Comic science fiction Category:American fantasy films Category:American comedy science fiction films Category:Mickey Mouse short films Category:American animated films Category:1990s comedy films
↩
↩
