The Galaxiidae, also known by the anglicised name as galaxiids, are a family of mostly small freshwater fish in the southern hemisphere. The majority of species live in Australia or New Zealand, some are also found in South Africa, South America, Lord Howe Island, New Caledonia and the Falkland Islands. One of the galaxiid species, the common galaxias (Galaxias maculatus), is probably the most widely naturally distributed freshwater fish in the southern hemisphere. They are cool water species, found in temperate latitudes, with only one species known from sub-tropical habitat.1 Many specialise in living in cold, high altitude upland rivers, streams and lakes.
Some galaxiids live in freshwater all their lives but many have a partially marine life cycle. In these cases, larvae are hatched in a river but are washed downstream to the ocean, later returning to rivers as juveniles to complete their development to full adulthood. This pattern differs from that of salmon, which only return to freshwater to breed, and is described as amphidromous.2
Freshwater galaxiid species are gravely threatened by exotic salmonid species, particularly trout species, which prey upon galaxiids and compete with them for food. Exotic salmonids have been recklessly introduced to many different landmasses (e.g. Australia, New Zealand), with no thought as to impacts on native fish, or attempts to preserve salmonid-free habitats for them. Numerous localised extinctions of galaxiid species have been caused by the introduction of exotic salmonids and a number of freshwater galaxiid species are threatened with overall extinction by exotic salmonids.3
Taxonomic diversity
There are about fifty species in the Galaxiidae family, grouped into seven genera.4
Genera
Aplochiton (2 species)
Brachygalaxias (2 species)
Galaxias (34 species)
Galaxiella (3 species)
Lovettia (1 species)
Neochanna (6 species)
Paragalaxias (4 species)
Species by geography
Australia
Galaxiids are found around the south eastern seaboard of Australia and in some parts of south western Australia. Species that are common to all areas are:
Common galaxias or Jollytail galaxias, Galaxias maculatus
Spotted galaxias, Spotted mountain trout, or Spotted minnow, Galaxias truttaceus
South East Australian mainland
Climbing galaxias, Galaxias brevipinnis
Mountain galaxias, Galaxias olidus
Flathead galaxias (Australia), Galaxias rostratus
Threatened species are:
Barred galaxias, Galaxias fuscus (Victoria)
Dwarf galaxias (Australia), Galaxiella pusilla (South Australia, Victoria)
Tasmanian mudfish, Neochanna cleaveri (Wilsons Promontory, Victoria)
Western Australia
Western galaxias, Galaxias occidentalis
Mud minnow, Galaxiella munda
Black-stripe minnow, Galaxiella nigrostriata
Tasmania Fifteen species of galaxiids have been found in Tasmania. The most common species are:
Climbing galaxias, Galaxias brevipinnis
Common galaxias, Galaxias maculatus
Spotted galaxias, Galaxias truttaceus
While endangered species are:
Saddled galaxias, Galaxias tanycephalus
Pedder galaxias, Galaxias pedderensis
Swan galaxias, Galaxias fontanus
Swamp galaxias, Galaxias parvus
Golden galaxias, Galaxias auratus
Dwarf galaxias (Australia), Galaxiella pusilla
Clarence galaxias, Galaxias johnstoni
Tasmanian mudfish, Neochanna cleaveri
Western paragalaxias, Paragalaxias julianus
Great Lake paragalaxias, Paragalaxias eleotroides
Arthurs paragalaxias, Paragalaxias mesotes
Shannon paragalaxias, Paragalaxias dissimilis
New Zealand
Twenty-two species of galaxiids have been discovered in New Zealand. Most of these live in freshwater all their lives. However, the larvae of five species of the Galaxias genus develop in the ocean where they form part of the plankton and return to rivers and streams as juveniles (whitebait) where they develop and remain as adults. All Galaxias species found in New Zealand are endemic, except for Galaxias brevipinnis (koaro) and Galaxias maculatus (inanga).
Roundhead galaxias, Galaxias anomalus
Giant kokopu, Galaxias argenteus
Koaro or short-fin galaxias, Galaxias brevipinnis
Lowland longjawed galaxias, Galaxias cobitinis
Flathead galaxias, Galaxias depressiceps
Dwarf galaxias, Galaxias divergens
Eldons galaxias, Galaxias eldoni
Banded kokopu, Galaxias fasciatus
Gollum galaxias, Galaxias gollumoides
Dwarf inanga, Galaxias gracilis
Bignose galaxias, Galaxias macronasus
Inanga, common galaxias or common jollytail, Galaxias maculatus
Alpine galaxias, Galaxias paucispondylus
Shortjaw kokopu, Galaxias postvectis
Longjawed galaxias, Galaxias prognathus
Dusky galaxias, Galaxias pullus
Common river galaxias or Canterbury galaxias, Galaxias vulgaris
Brown mudfish, Neochanna apoda
Canterbury mudfish, Neochanna burrowsius
Black mudfish, Neochanna diversus
Northland mudfish, Neochanna heleios
Chatham mudfish, Neochanna rekohua
South America
Puyen, Galaxias maculatus (Chile, Argentina)
Aplochiton marinus / Aplochiton taeniatus (Chile / Argentina)
Brachygalaxias bullocki (Chile)
Brachygalaxias gothei (Chile)
South Africa
Cape galaxias, Galaxias zebratus (Cape Province, South Africa)
Fishing
The juveniles of those galaxiids that develop in the ocean and then move into rivers for their adult life are caught as whitebait while moving upstream and are much valued as a delicacy. Adult galaxiids may be caught for food but they are generally not large. In some cases their exploitation may be banned (i.e. New Zealand) unless available to indigenous tribes.
In addition to serious impacts from exotic trout species, Australian adult galaxiids suffer a disregard from anglers for being &quot;too small&quot; and &quot;not being trout&quot;. This is despite the fact that several Australian galaxiid species, though smallish, grow to a sufficient size to be catchable and readily take wet and dry flies, and that one of these species &lt;U+2014&gt; the spotted galaxias &lt;U+2014&gt; was keenly fished for in Australia before the introduction of exotic trout species. A handful of fly-fishing exponents in Australia are rediscovering the pleasure of catching (and releasing) these fascinating Australian native fish on ultra-light fly-fishing tackle.
References
External links
Category:Freshwater fish of New Zealand Category:Freshwater fish of Australia  
McDowall, R.M. (2006) Crying wolf, crying foul, or crying shame: alien salmonids and a biodiversity crisis in the southern cool-temperate galaxioid fishes? Rev Fish Biol Fisheries 16: 233&lt;U+2013&gt;422.↩
↩
↩
