Warhawk is a futuristic arcade-style flight-combat game for the Sony PlayStation console, developed by SingleTrac and released by Sony. It was originally released on November 10, 1995, and later re-released as part of Sony's Greatest Hits lineup. A multiplayer-only remake of the same name has been developed by Incognito Entertainment; it was released on Blu-ray disc and as a digital download for the PlayStation 3 on August 28, 2007. This game is also available for download from the PlayStation Store.
Overview
Warhawk is an vehicle simulation game built around a futuristic VTOL craft. The player maneuvers with 360 degrees of flight control through 6 unique levels. Weapons include fire off lock-ons, rockets, multi-fire swarmers, and plasma cannons.
Enemies in the game vary from being tanks and aircraft to massive fixed gun emplacements and futuristic robots, to name a few. In certain areas of the game, enemies continuously respawn to challenge the player until they swiftly complete the mission objective.
There are no saving or loading features. Instead, a password is presented each time a level is completed.
The game has no multiplayer capabilities and does not feature DualShock or analog controller support. In Twisted Metal: Black, a version of Warhawk was the final boss.
Plotline
The plot of the game centers around a megalomaniac named Kreel who has become a global threat and is threatening various nations with his seemingly unstoppable armies. As the player you take the role of two pilots named 'Hatch' and 'Walker' who are part of an international force devoted to fighting Kreel and his varied minions.
As the campaign progresses, it is revealed that the source of Kreel's power is Red Mercury, which provides his forces with their nigh-invulnerability. It should be noted that Kreel's motivation is never truly fleshed out and he seems to fall into the role of a stereotypical insane megalomaniac.
In addition, a quirky sense of humor the game seems to have is the various endings that occur based on what level you fail or what actions you take at the end of the game. Some of the endings include (but are not limited to) a costly nuclear war, Kreel choking to death on a chicken bone, a happy ending selling &quot;I survived the Red Mercury war&quot; baseball caps, or both pilots being served as the main course at Kreel's grand victory ceremony. Humor is also evident in the live-action FMV sequences, such as during the opening cinematic when one of the pilots remarks, &quot;I should have been a dentist.&quot;
See also
Warhawk (PlayStation 3 game)
External links
Warhawk at GameSpot
ca:Warhawk
Category:1996 video games Category:PlayStation 3 Network games Category:PlayStation games Category:Warhawk
