Steve &quot;Pablo&quot; Davis born Paul Meier Klienbordt, 1916 in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, US. Davis is an American artist, life-long communist activist and Detroit community organizer. He is the last living member of the team of artists who worked with Diego Rivera on the Detroit Industry mural which is in the central courtyard, Rivera Court, of the Detroit Institute of Arts.
Early life
Davis was raised by his Jewish immigrant parents in Philadelphia. He worked as a coal miner at age 14 until he became involved in a violent strike. After this strike he left Pennsylvania to ride the rails as a young hobo. Responding to an ad in the newspaper, his travels eventually took him to Detroit, Michigan where, at age 16, he meet the Mexican muralist Diego Rivera and Rivera's wife Frida Kahlo.1 By this time Davis had become a militant communist. He served in the American volunteer Abraham Lincoln Brigade during the Spanish Civil War.2 Davis claims that he and the then House Unamerican Activities Committee lawyer Richard Nixon squared-off in a shouting match when he was call to testify before the committee.3 Davis has stated that he changed his name from Paul Klienbordt in the 1950s after doing prison time for activities related to migrant labor organizing in Colorado, although this cannot be independently verified.45
Pablo Davis, born Paul Kleinbord to Joseph and Rose Kleinbord in Philadelphia, PA lived with his family in Philadelphia until at least the age of 18. He is not listed in the archives for the Abraham Lincoln Brigade.
Born Paul Kleinbord, he attended high school in Philadelphia. After graduation he went on to attend art school for a period of time. This was also in Philadelphia. He married and his wife gave birth to a son. During the 1930's and early 1940's he was living in Philadelphia and didn't leave for any significant period of time. About 1945 he was sent to a sanatorium in Denver, CO because he had contracted tuberculosis. He remained in Denver until the early 1950's which is when he arrived in Detroit with his second wife. He lived in Ann Arbor for a period of time, then moved to Detroit where he has lived since.-
Artistic career
Detroit Industry, South Wall, 1932-33. Detroit Institute of Arts Davis is the last surviving artist who worked on this project.
Davis's work ranges from representational post-impressionism to highly abstract expressionism. Much of Davis's art is influenced by the cubism of Pablo Picasso, who he has claimed to have studied under and worked with in Europe. His other major influence is Diego Rivera and the other Mexican muralists. Davis assisted Diego Rivera on the Detroit Industry mural panels in Rivera Court in the Detroit Institute of Arts. Davis says that he painted a &quot;Dick Tracey&quot; like face on one of the figures when Rivera asked for a tough looking figure.6 He also assisted Rivera on a mural painted inside the Ford Motor Company's Rouge Plant, in Dearborn, Michigan.7 One of Davis's paintings is displayed in the Louvre. Davis's painting of Michigan Governor John Swainson is hung in rotunda of the Michigan Capitol Building. He has painted commissioned portraits of celebrities including Katharine Hepburn and Marilyn Monroe. Davis is also known for his community mural projects in which he works with young people to produce large scale co-operatively produced paintings. At least two of these murals can be found in Southwest Detroit.8
Davis has been a long time member of Detroit's Scarab Club a gallery and social venue for leading Detroit artists. His autograph is founds on the club's ceiling beam along with the autographs of Diego Rivera, Norman Rockwell and John Sloan. Signing the ceiling beams is a Scarab Club tradition honoring distinguished guests and members.9
Community activism
Davis resides in Southwest Detroit, the heart of the city's barrio and the home to many enclave neighborhood of great cultural and ethnic diversity. Since the 1980s Davis has been active in an ecumenical project seeking to unite this community around the development of senior housing and services for children, first through the community based group Ecumenical Project SAVE and later Bridging Communities Inc. This activism has resulted in an 80 unit senior affordable housing project known as the &quot;Pablo Davis Senior Center.&quot; This project also incorporates intergenerational programs to enhance services for both seniors and children. Davis, who has donated much of his portfolio and collection to this project, resides and maintains a studio in this complex. Although still an avowed communist and revolutionary, Davis asserts he is comfortable working with this mostly religious and Christian group.1011
Neither Steve Davis nor Pablo Davis are listed on the Lourvre website as being in their collection
Recent years
In 2005 two Madonna University students, Christina Warren and Adam Guth received a grant from the Michigan Campus Compact to make a film about Davis's role in Detroit Industry.12 The documentary, The Life and Art of Pablo Davis was released in December 2006. They won an Emmy Award for Best College Student Documentary, presented by the Michigan Chapter of National Academy of Television Arts and Science at the Gem Theater in Detroit on June 16, 2007. From 2005 through 2007 Davis gained public attention by his participation as the oldest contributor to the annual Valentine's Day Dirty Show an art exhibit hosted by Bert's Warehouse Theater in Detroit's Eastern Market. The show features a wide variety of erotic art, ranging from pornographic to kinky to romantic. Davis frequently acted as a spokesperson for this event.1314 Davis also frequently provides tours and lectures at the Detroit Institute of Arts concerning the Detroit Industry murals.15
References
External sources
Pablo Davis's web site
Bridging Communities listing
Category:1916 births Category:Living people Category:American artists Category:American communists Category:American Jews Category:American people of the Spanish Civil War Category:Artists from Pennsylvania
Biography in Model D-troiter↩
Kleinbordt, Paul (aka Steve &quot;Pablo&quot; Davis) participation in Abraham Lincoln Brigade, Robert F. Wagner Labor Archives↩
Metro Times biography article↩
[http://www.metrotimes.com/editorial/story.asp?id=7125. Metro Times Ibid]↩
Model D article Supra↩
Detroit News Article on Davis's role in Detroit Industry↩
Metro Times article, Supra.↩
Examples of Davis's community murals↩
History of Scarab Club↩
Metro Times article on Davis's role in Bridging Communities project↩
[http://www.uaw.org/solidarity/00/0500/feature02.html. Solidarity article on Bridging Communities project]↩
Posting of documentary film grant award↩
South End Article on Dirty Show↩
Detroit News article on Dirty Show and Davis's work↩
Metro Times Article, Supra.↩
