On February 28, 1966, a NASA T-38 crash at Lambert Field in St. Louis, Missouri killed two American Project Gemini astronauts, Elliot See and Charles Bassett. The aircraft, which was piloted by See, crashed into the McDonnell Aircraft building where their spacecraft was being assembled. A NASA panel, headed by chief astronaut Alan Shepard investigated the crash. While it considered possible medical issues or aircraft maintenance problems in addition to the weather and air traffic control factors, the end verdict was that the crash was caused by pilot error.
In the aftermath of the crash, the backup crew of Thomas Stafford and Eugene Cernan were moved up to the prime position for the Gemini 9 mission. Jim Lovell and Buzz Aldrin, who had formerly been the backup for Gemini 10, became the mission's backup crew, and through the normal rotation were then assigned as prime crew for Gemini 12. Without the Gemini experience, it is unlikely that Aldrin would have been assigned to the Apollo 11 mission, where he became the second human to walk on the moon.
The accident
See and Bassett were the prime crew assigned to the Gemini 9 mission. They and the backup crew for the mission, Thomas Patten Stafford and Eugene Cernan, were flying to St. Louis from their normal training base in Houston, Texas, for two weeks of simulator training for rendezvous and docking procedures at McDonnell Aircraft,1 which was the prime contractor for the Gemini spacecraft. It was a routine flight they had made many times previously.2
See and Bassett flew in one Northrop T-38 Talon jet trainer, tail number NASA 901, with See at the controls and Bassett in the rear seat. A second T-38, NASA 907, carried Stafford (the pilot) and Cernan. The two aircraft took off from Ellington Air Force Base in Texas at 7:35 am, with See in the lead and Stafford in wing position.3 Weather at Lambert Field in St. Louis was poor, with rain, snow, and fog, broken clouds at 800 feet and a ceiling at 1500 feet, requiring an instrument approach. When the two aircraft emerged below the clouds shortly before 9 am, both pilots realized they had missed the outer marker and overshot runway 12R.
See then elected to perform a visual circling approach, which is a simplified landing procedure allowed for planes flying under instrument rules as long as the pilot can keep the airfield and any preceding aircraft in sight. The reported weather conditions at the airport were adequate for this type of approach, but visibility was irregular and deteriorating rapidly.4 Stafford began to follow See's plane, but when he lost sight of it in the clouds he instead followed the standard procedure for a missed approach and pulled his aircraft up, back into the clouds for another attempt at an instrument landing.5
See completed a full circle to the left at an altitude of 500 to 600 feet, and announced his intention to land on the southeast runway.6 With gear down and full flaps, the plane dropped quickly, and it was also too far to the left of the runway.7 See turned on the afterburners to increase power while pulling up and turning hard to the right. Seconds later, the plane struck the roof of McDonnell Building 101 on the northeast side of the airport, losing its right wing and landing gear, before bouncing and cartwheeling off the roof and finally crashing into a parking lot beyond the building, which was being used as a construction staging area.
Both astronauts died instantly from trauma injuries in the crash. Bassett's death was particularly gruesome as he was decapitated in the impact with the roof (his head was later found wedged in the rafters).8 Inside Building 101, 17 McDonnell employees and contractors received mostly minor injuries from debris falling from the roof.9 The crash set off several small fires inside the building,10 and caused flooding from broken pipes and sprinklers.11 By coincidence, See and Bassett died within 500 feet of the very spacecraft that they were to have flown in orbit, which was in the final stages of assembly in another part of Building 101.12 The Gemini 9 capsule was undamaged, but a piece of debris from the T-38's wing struck the unfinished Gemini 10 spacecraft.
Meanwhile, Stafford and Cernan, still circling in the clouds in the second T-38, had no idea what had happened to the other plane. Air traffic controllers were apparently confused by the two planes in the flight attempting different abort actions after the initial missed approach, and moreover no one on the ground knew who was in the crashed plane.13 After some delay, Stafford and Cernan were asked to identify themselves and given permission to land, but they were not informed of the crash until on the ground. Although personally distraught over the loss of his close colleagues and friends, Stafford acted as NASA's chief contact on the scene until other personnel arrived to relieve him later in the day.
Investigation and aftermath
NASA immediately appointed its own 7-member panel, headed by Alan Shepard, to investigate the crash. While they considered possible medical issues or aircraft maintenance problems in addition to the weather and air traffic control factors, the end verdict was predictably pilot error, citing See's inability &quot;to maintain visual reference for a landing&quot; as the primary cause of the crash.14 See was described as a &quot;cautious and conservative&quot; pilot in the accident report. In his memoir, chief astronaut Deke Slayton was less diplomatic, calling See's piloting skills &quot;old womanish&quot;. Others, including Neil Armstrong, have since defended See's piloting ability.15
Since the loss of the Gemini 9 crew was unrelated to space flight operations and the spacecraft itself was undamaged &lt;U+2014&gt; it was shipped to NASA 2 days after the crash &lt;U+2014&gt; the accident did not cause delays or engineering changes in the U.S. space program. However, it did cause reshuffling of crew assignments for subsequent Gemini and Apollo missions. Stafford and Cernan were moved up to the prime position for the Gemini 9 mission, which was re-designated Gemini 9A. James Lovell and Buzz Aldrin, who had formerly been the backup for Gemini 10, became the backup for Gemini 9A, and through the normal rotation were then assigned as prime crew for Gemini 12. Without the Gemini experience, it is unlikely that Aldrin would have been assigned to the Apollo 11 mission, where he became the second human to walk on the moon.
Notes
References
External links
Photos from the St. Louis Post-Dispatch
Category:1966 in spaceflight Category:Gemini mission Category:Space program fatalities Category:Aviation accidents and incidents in 1966 Category:Aviation accidents and incidents caused by pilot error Category:Aviation accidents and incidents in the United States
