Florida State University
Motto:
Established:
Type:
Endowment:
President:
Faculty:
Staff:
Students:
Undergraduates:
Postgraduates:
Location:
Campus:
Colors:
Nickname:
Website:
Florida State University (commonly referred to as Florida State or FSU)1 is a public research university located in Tallahassee, the capital city of Florida. It is a comprehensive doctoral research university with medical programs involving very high research activity as determined by the Carnegie Foundation.2 The university comprises 16 separate colleges and 39 centers, facilities, labs and institutes that offer more than 300 programs of study, including professional programs.3
As one of Florida's primary graduate research universities,4 Florida State University awards over 2,000 graduate and professional degrees each year.513 FloridaToday.com (Copyright &lt;U+00A9&gt; 2007, Florida Today. All rights reserved.) Crist signs differential tuition bill (By Aaron DeSlatte and Angeline Taylor - Florida Capital Bureau) Retrieved on 6-30-2007 Florida State is also one of two flagship universities in the State University System of Florida.6 7 8 While FSU was officially established in 1851 and is located on the oldest continuous site of higher education in the state of Florida, predecessor institutions may be traced back to 1843, two years before Florida was admitted as a state in the United States.910
Florida State University is also home to nationally ranked programs in many academic areas, including the sciences, social policy, film, engineering, the Arts, business, politics and law.11 Florida State is also home to Florida's only National Laboratory - the National High Magnetic Field Laboratory as well as being the birthplace of the commercially-viable anti-cancer drug Taxol. The renowned Florida State University athletics programs are favorites of passionate students, fans and alumni across the United States, especially when led by the Marching Chiefs of the FSU College of Music. Florida State is a member of the Atlantic Coast Conference and has won eleven national athletic championships to date.
__TOC__
History of the university
 Florida State University is one of the two oldest of the eleven institutions of higher learning in the State University System of Florida. Florida State University traces its origins to 1823 when the Territorial Legislature of Florida began planning a system of higher education.12 Two townships were set aside by the United States Congress for seminaries of higher learning, one on each side of the Suwannee River. By 1838, the first constitution of the State of Florida embraced and permanently guaranteed to provide for this system of general education (schools) and higher education (seminaries).13 On January 24, 1851 the State of Florida Legislature established the two seminaries.14 A bitter competition then ensued between the cities of Marianna, FL, Quincy, FL and Tallahassee for the West Florida Seminary. By 1854, as an inducement to the Legislature, the leaders of Tallahassee built and operated an all-male academy called the Florida Institute in Tallahassee.15 Francis W. Eppes, the grandson of Thomas Jefferson and who grew up on Monticello, with the help of other city leaders, eventually won the competition for the location, which awarded Tallahassee the west seminary by the Florida Legislature in 1856.  The rise of land slightly west of the center of Tallahassee, formerly known as Gallows Hill, (and which was the site and building of the ongoing Florida Institute) was offered and accepted as the site of the state seminary for male students. While the seminary did not officially hold classes until 1857, it absorbed the Tallahassee Female Academy16, begun in 1843 as the Misses Bates School, thereby becoming co-educational.17 As a result of this merger Florida State University is the oldest university in Florida, with clear predecessor operations traceable to 1843, about two years before Florida became a state of the United States. The West Florida Seminary stood near the front of the Westcott Building on the existing FSU campus.18 This site is the oldest continually used location of higher learning in Florida.1920The eastern seminary was located in Ocala, FL in 1853 and was closed during the American Civil War. It reopened in 1866 in Gainesville, FL (and would eventually be combined with other schools to form what would be called the University of Florida in 1906).21
During the Civil War the name of the seminary was changed to The Florida Military and Collegiate Institute and began military training for students. Young cadets from the school, along with other soldiers from Tallahassee, defeated Union forces at the Battle of Natural Bridge in 1865 .2223 As a result, Tallahassee was the only Confederate capital east of the Mississippi River not to fall to Union forces. The Army ROTC unit at Florida State University is one of only three ROTC units in the United States with permission to display a campaign streamer. The Florida State University ROTC streamer reads NATURAL BRIDGE 1865. After the fall of the Confederacy, campus buildings were occupied by Union forces for over a month. The West Florida Seminary reverted to a purely academic purpose after the war, and began a period of substantial growth and development. In 1884, the school awarded its first diplomas, called Licentiates of Instruction. In 1885 the Florida Legislature renamed the seminary the University of Florida in a law which was part of an effort by the Board of Education to reorganize Florida's system of higher education. The school never embraced the title, apparently due to lack of funding from the Florida Legislature, but when other schools eventually tried to adopt the name &quot;University of Florida&quot; about 20 years later, officials from the Florida State College reminded the newcomers of the law and the original holder of the title in a 1903 university publication.24 By 1891 the seminary began to focus on what would be recognized today as post-secondary education and as of 1897 was clearly the first liberal arts college in Florida.25
 In 1901 the seminary was renamed the Florida State College and was organized into four departments (the College, the College Academy, the School for Teachers and the School of Music). Florida State College was a four-year institution with authority to award the Master of Arts graduate degree. The first master's degree was issued by the college in 1902.
The 1905 Buckman Act reorganized the existing seven Florida colleges into three institutions, segregated by race and gender - a school for Caucasian males, a school for Caucasian females and a school for African Americans. As a result of this reorganization, the coeducational Florida State College was renamed the Florida Female College, (which by 1909 was changed to the Florida State College for Women (FSCW) after the initial women's title was generally rejected) and accepted only white female students.26 All male students were subsequently required to attend the school for males, taking with them the fraternity system and the football team. The Buckman bill was the brainchild of H.H. Buckman, a legislator from Duval County, Florida. The Buckman bill was hotly debated, one legislator said in debate: &quot;I believe in coeducation. Statistics prove satisfactory to me that separate institutions for male and female is detrimental (sic) to both--physically, mentally and morally.&quot;27 Further, per Shira Birnbaum, Ph.D in her article Making Southern belles in progressive era Florida: Gender in the formal and hidden curriculum of the Florida Female College (Frontiers: A Journal of Women Studies, 1996) the Buckman Act:
didn't merely standardize, consolidate and narrow opportunities for public higher education in Florida. It also inaugurated an era of new school gender practices. Right from the start, in fact, the Buckman Act's message to Florida's women was that the highest levels of educational attainment--the advanced degrees and professional schools of a &quot;university education--would be reserved for white males attending the new all-male University of the State of Florida. White women, by contrast, had to settle for a &quot;college.&quot; Furthermore, the Buckman Act mandated that the university would &quot;teach...the fundamental laws and...the rights and duties of citizens ...&quot; to its male students. The college, by contrast, would &quot;teach...all the useful arts and sciences that may be necessary or appropriate.&quot; A dual discourse had been laid out--one that framed education for white men as a matter of &quot;citizenship&quot; and education for white women as a matter of &quot;usefulness&quot;.28
A residence hall currently on the campus of the University of Florida bears the name Buckman Hall in honor of the legislator. Curiously, no equivalent building exists on the campus of Florida State University.29
Despite the impact of the Buckman Act, Albert A. Murphree, then President of the Florida State College, determined to stress liberal studies and academic excellence.30 By 1933 the Florida State College for Women had grown to be the third largest women&lt;U+2019&gt;s college in the United States.31 In 1935, the College was awarded the Alpha Chapter of Phi Beta Kappa in Florida.3233 The Florida State College for Women was the first state women's college in the South to be awarded a chapter of Phi Beta Kappa, as well as the first university in Florida to be so honored for academic quality.34  After World War II, returning soldiers taking advantage of the new GI Bill of Rights placed an unexpectedly heavy demand on the state university system. The Tallahassee Branch of the University of Florida (TBUF) was quickly opened on the campus of the Florida State College for Women.3536 The men were housed in former barracks on Dale Mabry Field, an existing WWII U.S. Army Air Force training field west of Tallahassee, that was deactivated in part after the war. Male students were then enrolled into the Florida State College for Women and traveled to the main campus by bus. Part of Dale Mabry Field became known as &quot;West Campus&quot; during this brief period. By the end of the 1946-1947 school year, 954 men were enrolled in the TBUF program. By 1947 the Florida Legislature returned the FSCW to coeducational status and renamed the Florida State College for Women Florida State University.37 The FSU West Campus land and barracks plus other areas continually used as an airport later became the location of the Tallahassee Community College.  The 1950s brought substantial growth and development to the university. Several colleges were added and the first Ph.D. was awarded in Chemistry by 1952 . Many buildings recognizable today were added to the university such as the Strozier Library, Tully Gymnasium and the original parts of the Business building. Programs supplementing the original liberal arts and education departments were added including Business, Journalism (discontinued in 1959), Library Science, Nursing and Social Welfare. Social Welfare was later split into the College of Criminology and the College of Social Work.
During the 1960s and 1970s Florida State University was known as a center of student activism especially in the areas of racial integration, women's rights and the Vietnam War. The school acquired the nickname 'Berkeley of the South'38 during this period, in reference to similar student activities at the University of California, Berkeley and is also purported to be the site of the genesis of &quot;streaking,&quot; which is said to have first been observed on Landis Green.3940 Governor Claude Kirk once spent a night on Landis Green, in the center of campus, discussing politics with protesting students. Elements of free speech activism still exist at FSU today. The Center for Participant Education was established in 1970 as an alternative to traditional university academics. Its purpose is to allow students to &quot;explore socially relevant topics and to foster a healthier philosophy of education through classes in which anyone could teach or attend. Since then, CPE has been investigated by the Legislature, suspended by the Board of Regents, and challenged by FSU administration. CPE has managed to hold strong through all of this, and remains today as one of the last free universities in the country.&quot;41 Florida State also established the Institute of Molecular Biophysics, Space Biosciences and the Programs in Medical Studies. In 1962 the first African American student enrolled at the university and the first African American Ph.D. students graduated in 1970.
Today, Florida State University aspires to become a top American research university with at least one-third of its graduate programs ranked in the Top-15 nationally. Florida State University owns more than 1,530 acres (6.2km&lt;U+00B2&gt;)42 and is the home of the National High Magnetic Field Laboratory among other advanced research facilities. The university continues to develop in its capacity as a leader in Florida graduate research. Other milestones at the university include the first ETA10-G/8 supercomputer43, capable of 10.8 GFLOPS in 1989, remarkable for the time in that it exceeded the existing speed record of the Cray-2/8, located at the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory by a substantial leap and the development of the anti-cancer drug Taxol.
The Jefferson-Eppes Trophy is exchanged between the University of Virginia and Florida State University after each football competition in recognition of the common roots shared between the two schools.
Pathways of Excellence
 The strategic vision of Florida State University, known as Pathways of Excellence, changed in September 2005 as the result of an evaluation of &quot;FSU&lt;U+2019&gt;s academic productivity and recognition as viewed in the context of the Phase I and Phase II indicators for membership in the Association of American Universities (AAU) and the standards used by the National Research Council for evaluating doctoral programs.&quot;44 The task group made recommendations, on which FSU President Wetherell acted, which are intended to have a dramatic transformational effect on the overall academic quality and scholarly productivity of the university. The faculty group created specific goals for the university which include substantial investment in new university faculty hired in &quot;academic clusters&quot;45 focused principally on doctoral-level research. Coupled with this investment in 200 new faculty members is an aggressive expansion of the physical infrastructure of the university.46 To date, new construction is underway or recently completed for a new Experimental Social Science Laboratory, a College of Medicine Research Building, a new Psychology Building, a new Chemistry Building, a new Life Sciences Teaching and Research Building and a new Materials Research Building.
Concurrently, other existing research facilities at the university have been renovated, including the Nancy Smith Fichter Dance Theatre, the Kasha Laboratory of the Institute of Molecular Biophysics plus enhancements to the National High Magnetic Field Laboratory and a new Applied Superconductivity Center.
Enrollment and admissions
Fall 2006 enrollment at Florida State consisted of 40,474 graduate and undergraduate students, including students enrolled in professional programs like law and medicine. Students at FSU come from all 50 states and 137 other countries. Women account for 57% of student enrollment, while minorities made up 25% percent of the student population.47
The Fall 2006 freshman class had an SAT middle 50% range of 1140 - 1280, a middle 50% ACT range of 25 - 28, and a middle 50% GPA range of 3.4 - 4.1. The SAT scores reported include scores of students admitted through alternative programs.48 The top 25% of fall freshmen students at Florida State University enrolled with an average GPA of 4.23, average SAT score of 1332 and average ACT score of 30.49
The freshman acceptance rate for the 2006 Fall semester was 53.7%. Preliminary reports for the Fall 2007 semester indicate an acceptance rate drop to 46% due to an increase in undergraduate applicants along with an increasing freshmen retention rate. 50 Recently, the administration at Florida State has publicly discussed reducing freshman enrollment due to reductions in state appropriations.51 59 Florida State University - FSU News: &quot;FSU freezes enrollment, tightens budgets&quot; Retrieved on 6-30-2007.
The most popular Colleges by enrollment are Arts and Sciences, Business, Social Sciences, Education, and Human Science.
A number of undergraduate academic programs at Florida State University are termed &quot;Limited Access Programs&quot;. Limited Access Programs are programs where student demand exceeds available resources thus making admission to such programs sometimes extremely competitive. Examples of limited access programs include The Florida State University Film School, the College of Communication, several majors in the College of Visual Arts, Theatre and Dance and all majors in the College of Business.52
Undergraduate Honors Program
 The FSU Honors Program is a specially designed program for the most accomplished incoming undergraduates. Undergraduates in Honors participate in smaller classes with faculty, including individual research programs or assigned research in the area of the sponsoring faculty member. Admission to Honors is competitive. The FSU Honors Medical and Law early-admission, professional-track programs are designed to facilitate faster access to professional programs for the limited number of students who meet required standards. Honors students are eligible for the Honors residence hall and associated administrative benefits.
Young Scholars Program
FSU Young Scholars Program (YSP) is a residential science and mathematics program for 40 Florida high-school students with potential for careers in the sciences53, engineering, and health professions.54 In 2005, the mean PSAT math score was in the 98th percentile nationally. Eleven of the 40 students were ranked first in their class, and the rest were all in the top 10% of their class. The average GPA of attendees in 2005 was 4.84.
Academic rankings
 Florida State University has nationally recognized graduate, undergraduate and professional programs that include Law and Medicine.
National Rankings
Previous National Rankings
Florida State University was ranked 16th nationally in the February 2007 edition of Kiplinger's Best Values in Public Colleges.55 FSU is the second least expensive flagship university in the U.S., according to USATODAY.56 In the 2007 edition of U.S. News &amp; World Report's America's Best Colleges, Florida State, as an undergraduate university, was ranked as a Top National University at 51st (from 54th in 2005) among all public research universities in the United States. Florida State is ranked 110th (from 111 in 2005) among all national universities. Florida State University joins the University of Florida as the top-ranked public universities in Florida, the only Florida publics in the top U.S. News ranking tier, and the only Florida publics listed in the Academic Ranking of World Universities Top 100 American Universites5758. FSU has a 66% six-year graduation rate, while the national average six-year graduation rate is 54%. FSU has an 87% freshman retention rate, competitive with any of its peer institutions.59
Many of FSU's academic programs rank among the nation&lt;U+2019&gt;s top twenty-five public universities, including programs in Business, Chemistry, Creative Writing, Criminology, Dance, Education, Film, Human Sciences, Hospitality, Information Technology, Law, Meteorology, Music, Oceanography, Physics, Political Science, Public Administration and Policy, Social Work, Spanish, Theatre, Urban Planning, and Visual Art.6061
Collections
 Florida State University maintains and operates The John and Mable Ringling Museum of Art located in Sarasota, FL, which is recognized as the official State Art Museum of Florida.62 The institution offers twenty-one galleries of European paintings as well as Cypriot antiquities and Asian, American, and contemporary art. The museum's art collection currently consists of more than 10,000 objects that include a wide variety of paintings, sculpture, drawings, prints, photographs, and decorative arts from ancient through contemporary periods and from around the world. The most celebrated items in the museum are 16th, 17th, and 18th century European paintings, including a world-renowned collection of Peter Paul Rubens paintings.6371 ArtCyclopedia.com - Peter Paul Rubens, Paintings in Museums and Public Art Galleries Retrieved on 5-02-2007.
The expansive collections of the Ringling Museum constitute the largest university museum complex in the United States.64
Florida State University also maintains the FSU Museum of Fine Arts (MoFA) in Tallahassee. The MoFA permanent collection consists of over 4000 items in 18 sub-collections ranging from pre-Columbian pottery to contemporary art.65
Colleges
Florida State University offers Associate, Bachelor, Masters, Specialist, Doctoral, and Professional degree programs through its sixteen colleges. These include:
College of Arts &amp; Sciences
College of Business
College of Communication
College of Criminology &amp; Criminal Justice
College of Education
College of Engineering
College of Human Sciences
College of Information
College of Law
College of Medicine
College of Motion Picture, Television &amp; Recording Arts
College of Music
College of Nursing
College of Social Sciences
College of Social Work
College of Visual Arts, Theatre &amp; Dance
College of Arts and Sciences
 The College of Arts and Sciences encompases the fields of social sciences, liberal arts, mathematics, sciences and interdisciplinary studies. Several academic programs enjoy national reputations. These include the Department of English, which boasts one of the nation's top creative writing programs; the Classics Department, which offers comprehensive programs ranging from analysis of Roman literature to archeology; and several other programs, including the Departments of Geography and Oceanography.
Biological Sciences
The Department of Biological Sciences includes world class faculty in cellular and molecular biology, computational biology, evolution and ecology, and neuroscience. The Department has embarked on an innovative new cluster hiring initiative that focuses on the integration of genotype and phenotype. FSU's new Life Sciences Teaching and Research Building is a state-of-the-art facility that will provide over 90,000 net square feet of space for instruction, research, and support services. The design features rooftop research greenhouses and an open ground floor cloister for students, faculty, and staff. Other features include a 150 seat auditorium, biology teaching laboratories, and more than 30 research laboratories for the Department of Biological Science.
Chemistry and Biochemistry
 Also working in the field of materials science and nanoscience at FSU is the Nobel laureate Sir Harry Kroto, the co-discoverer of the C-60 'buckyball', who is a member of FSU's Chemistry and Biochemistry Department. Research in the Chemistry department currently spans fields ranging from analytical through organic, using experimental techniques and equipment including advanced lasers, spectrometers66 and superconducting magnets. A new, 5-story 168,000 square foot chemistry building is currently under construction on the west side of FSU's campus; when complete, it will enhance the department's strengths in molecular recognition, materials, nanotechnology, biochemistry, molecular synthesis, computational chemistry, and advanced measurement science as well as further support its robust Ph.D. and postdoctoral fellow training programs.
Taxol - anti-cancer drug
A significant achievement at the university was chemistry professor and synthetic organic chemist, Robert A. Holton's synthesizing of Taxol on Dec. 9, 1993. The chemical has been used as an effective breast cancer and ovarian cancer treatment.
Dr. Holton and his organic chemistry team won a race to develop a cheaper semisynthetic version (Holton Taxol total synthesis). In 1993, Bristol-Myers Squibb began marketing Taxol&lt;U+00AE&gt;, ultimately earning more than $1.6 billion by the year 2000. Just like other chemotherapy drugs, it had side effects, but it also prolonged lives, and in many cases caused a full remission of cancer.67
Before the drug company's exclusive license expired, Florida State earned $351 million in royalties, vaulting the school into the ranks of Columbia University and California's state universities in research profits. By comparison, Taxol has earned Florida State more than three times what the popular beverage Gatorade earned the University of Florida.68
Computer Science
FSU's Computer Science program is a National Center of Academic Excellence in Information Assurance Education (CAE/IAE) by the National Security Agency. Florida State is the only university in Florida to achieve this status. Recently, computer security specialists from Florida State examined the computer code firmware contained within the Election Systems &amp; Software iVotronic Voting Machines used in the disputed 2006 congressional election of Florida's District 13 between Vern Buchanan and Christine Jennings.6970
Creative Writing Program
The Creative Writing program in the English Department at Florida State is home to winners of the Pulitzer Prize and National Book Award. FSU offers both Masters of Fine Arts and doctoral degrees in Creative Writing. The program claims no university Creative Writing program in the world has been included more often in the Harcourt Trade Publishers Best New American Voices. Recent graduates have published books with Hyperion, Norton, Viking, MacAdam/Cage Publishing, Penguin, Henry Holt, Simon &amp; Schuster, and Houghton Mifflin. Students have published in The Atlantic Monthly, Esquire, The Georgia Review, Glimmer Train, Harper's, Ploughshares, and many other quality magazines. Students have the chance to work both for a publisher (Fiction Collective 2) and for the program's official journal The Southeast Review.71
Meteorology
 Founded in 1949, the FSU Meteorology program is the largest and most complete meteorology program in the southeastern United States, with 16 faculty members, over 85 graduate students and approximately 200 undergraduate students.72 The Department of Meteorology is rated in the top ten programs in the United States by the National Research Council.73 The program is considered to be one of the top five comprehensive meteorology programs in the United States and the flagship program in the Southeast.74
Many graduates of the Florida State meteorology program whether bachelor's, master's or doctorate work in the national media including Neil Frank and Max Mayfield, former directors of the National Hurricane Center in Miami; Janice Huff of the NBC Today Show and on-air meteorologists from the The Weather Channel: Stephanie Abrams, Rich Johnson and Jennifer Lopez .
Physics
 The Department of Physics, comprising more than 60 faculty and over 100 graduate students, is a major research department, offering graduate programs that have been ranked amongst the best in the nation by U.S. News and World Report.75 Theoretical and experimental nuclear physics and particle physics are particularly strong areas; nuclear physics is currently rated with the Top 7 programs in the United States. There are also extensive research programs in biophysics, condensed matter physics and atomic physics, as well as an expanding astrophysics program.
In terms of major facilities, the Department has its own superconducting linear particle accelerator at which experiments ranging from precision atomic measurements to analysis of rare-isotope collisions are performed. Additionally, the Department is a heavy user of major national and international lab facilities. It maintains active groups working on experiments at Fermilab, CERN, Brookhaven National Laboratory, TJNAF, Argonne National Laboratory and several others. Indirectly, through current director Dr. Gregory Boebinger as well as his predecessor, laboratory founder Dr. Jack Crow, the Department operates the main complex of the multi discipline National High Magnetic Field Laboratory, located near campus at FSU's Innovation Park.
College of Business
The College of Business has consistently been ranked one of the Top 40 undergraduate business schools by U.S. News &amp; World Report. In the 2007 edition of US News &amp; World Report the undergraduate business program is ranked 25th among all public universities in the United States and has grown to be one of the nation's ten largest. Additionally, The Risk Management/Insurance program ranked 7th, and the Real Estate program is 10th among public universities.76 Most recently, the faculty of the Marketing department were ranked 5th in the nation in terms of scholarly research productivity.77 In the 2007 edition of BusinessWeek business school rankings Florida State's College of Business ranked 15th nationally among public universities for placement of graduates. FSU ranked higher than any other university business school in Florida.78
The college is a recognized leader in graduating minority doctoral candidates. The college earned a fourth-place spot in the Black Issues' Top 100 for its success in awarding the doctorate in business to African Americans. In the Academy of Management Journal, the college's program in Management Information Systems was ranked 15th nationally and is the highest ranked MIS program in the State of Florida.79 The graduate Accounting program is ranked 24th nationally while the undergraduate Accounting program ranked 25th in the nation according to Public Accounting Report's annual ratings.80 
Dedman School of Hospitality
The Dedman School of Hospitality in the College of Business is located at University Center B in the south endzone of Doak Campbell Stadium. Based on input from industry representatives, the hospitality management major's business component is what attracts companies to FSU students; as a result the school boasts a consistent 100% job placement record. The Dedman School of Hospitality also offers a major in Professional Golf Management, one of seventeen programs nationwide accredited by The Professional Golfers' Association of America (PGA), to prepare students to meet the challenges found in the world of professional golf. The state of Florida has more golf courses than any other state in the country and is the headquarters for the PGA, LPGA, PGA Tour, and National Golf Foundation and FSU has a long, distinguished history of graduating professional golfers and educating students for business and hospitality operations.81
College of Communication
The College of Communication has two departments, the Department of Communication and the Department of Communication Disorders. The Department of Communication is home to Seminole Productions, a leading sports production effort in the United States. The faculty and students of Seminole Productions have won more then 40 national and international awards for advanced video work.82 Within the Department of Communication Disorders, the discipline of Communication Sciences and Disorders researches the broad scope of human communication, both normal and disordered. Students in this discipline study the interrelated processes involved in communication and apply theory and research findings to clinical practice.
College of Criminology and Criminal Justice
The College of Criminology and Criminal Justice is the oldest program of its kind.83 It offers bachelor's, master's, and doctoral degrees. The College's graduate program emphasizes the importance of scientifically rigorous research that advances the knowledge of the discipline and informs public policy. The master's program prepares students for an administrative or research career in the criminal justice system and other related areas. The doctoral program trains individuals as critical scholars and prepares them for a career of teaching and research or for a higher-level research or administrative career in the criminal justice system.
Home to some of the nation's premier scholars in criminology, the College's faculty members lead the nation in funding for education and delinquency research, they conduct the most recognized research on fear and crime, they are known internationally for state-of-the-art law enforcement research, they are the most cited for national gun control research, and they are prominent scholars in the areas of self-control and crime and juvenile sentencing.
With $11 million in externally funded research projects, the College's Center for Criminology and Public Policy Research conducts ground-breaking research that promotes evidence-based policy-making and practice at state and national levels.84 It also provides unique hands-on research opportunities for graduate students.
College of Education
The College of Education has roots that reach back to the West Florida Seminary and the State Normal College for Teachers.85 The College has a number of nationally ranked programs and is in the Top 20 nationally in terms of doctoral degrees awarded.86
The College of Education has five academic departments which offer undergraduate and graduate degree programs in 27 fields of study. The academic programs prepare students for positions primarily in elementary and secondary schools, colleges and universities, vocational centers, and organizations that provide instructional design, counseling, recreational services and athletic training. Five online graduate degree program areas are available through the Distance Learning Program.87
College of Engineering
The College of Engineering, jointly operated with Florida A&amp;M University, operates from a 200,000 square foot complex of buildings near Innovation Park. Although the College of Engineering is jointly operated with FAMU, who remains responsible for the operating and maintenance budget for the building, the vast majority of students (over 80%) and faculty (over 65%) are associated with Florida State University. The College boasts six FSU research centers: the Florida Advanced Center for Composite Technologies (FAC2T) which became Florida&lt;U+2019&gt;s first National Science Foundation Industry/University Cooperative Research Center (I/UCRC); the Center for Intelligent Systems, Control, and Robotics (CISCOR); the Sustainable Energy Science and Engineering Center (SESEC); the Center for Advanced Power Systems (CAPS); the Center for Nanomagnetics and Biotechnology (CNB); and the Undergraduate Research Center for Cutting Edge Technologies (URCCET). The high level of research productivity at the College of Engineering provides opportunities for more than 300 graduate students to conduct their research. In 2006, the Board of Governors selected FSU's proposal for a Center of Excellence in Advanced Materials and FSU is presently constructing a 44,000 square foot Materials Research Building near the College of Engineering, which will house 13 laboratories for the design, processing and characterization of advanced materials and systems. It is expected that several College of Engineering faculty will be housed in this FSU building.
College of Human Sciences
The College of Human Sciences was established in 1905 and is considered the flagship human sciences program in Florida.88 The College consists of three departments - the Department of Family and Child Services, the Department of Nutrition, Food and Exercise Sciences and the Department of Textiles and Consumer Sciences. The College ranks consistently in the Top 15 nationally in terms of enrollment, endowment, grants and contracts and degrees granted and the Top 10 nationally in Human Sciences.89 The Department of Nutrition, Food and Exercise Sciences has the largest enrollment of pre-medical education students at FSU. It was also home to the now defunct &quot;Housing&quot; major, which was one of only four nationwide which focused on homes of all types as a product and how they impacted human health and behaviors.
College of Information
 The College of Information's programs in Information Science and Information Technology are consistently top-ranked programs in the nation and have held such rankings for many years in the U.S. News &amp; World Report.90 The college is currently ranked 10th overall nationally, the Services for Children and Youth specialization program ranked first, School Library Media program ranked 5th, and the Information Systems program ranked 10th. The college has the largest on-line MLS program in the nation.
The D'Alemberte Rotunda, part of FSU's College of Law, is used to host special events and in the past has been used by the Florida Supreme Court to convene special sessions
College of Law
The Florida State University College of Law is currently 53rd in the 2008 edition of the influential national rankings of law schools by U.S. News &amp; World Report.91 In terms of law students receiving professional employment after graduation it is ranked first in Florida. The magazine's 2008 edition of America's Best Graduate Schools also ranks the College of Law as one of the most diverse in the country. FSU's Environmental Law Program ranks 12th nationally, is among the top 5 public university Environmental Law programs in the U.S. It is the top ranked program of its sort in the Southeast, with the Tax Law program ranked at 21st overall.92 FSU's Law School achieved a higher passing rate on the Florida Bar than any other university in Florida in 2006.93 Hispanic Business magazine has ranked the College of Law among the top 10 law schools in the nation for Hispanics for the second consecutive year. Hispanics made up 9% of the school's 748-member student body and received 11% of the 205 law degrees awarded to the class of 2004. The College sponsors three co-curricular student-edited law reviews, namely the Florida State University Law Review, the Journal of Land Use and Environmental Law, and the Journal of Transnational Law and Policy.
College of Medicine
FSU's College of Medicine is a fully-accredited allopathic program, offering the M.D. degree for practicing physicians. The College of Medicine also offers a Ph.D. in Biomedical Sciences. Its faculty includes scientific researchers and practicing physicians, as well as researchers who focus on sociological and humanities issues in medical services industries. With its main campus in Tallahassee, where students complete their first two years, the medical school also has regional campuses in Orlando, Pensacola, Sarasota, and Tallahassee, where third- and fourth-year clinical training takes place. New campuses are under development in Ft. Pierce, FL and Daytona Beach, FL. In addition to the regional campuses, an optional Rural Track medical education program places students for their entire third year in small town practice settings in Northwest Florida. The FSU College of Medicine is affiliated with Sarasota Memorial Hospital, rated in 2006 by US News and World Report as the best hospital in Florida.9495 The College of Medicine facilities in Tallahassee include a 54,000-square-foot facility devoted to medical research, housing 48 research labs and space for a lab animal facility, as well as several core scientific labs for faculty.
College of Motion Picture, Television and Recording Arts
 The Florida State University Film School is regarded as one of the top film schools in the world and is well-known for selectivity in admissions.9697105 Florida State University, FSU News (04/30/2007): FSU Film School wins another one: 2007 College Television Award &quot;Recognized by the Directors Guild of America for its distinguished contributions to American culture, the FSU College of Motion Picture, Television and Recording Arts&lt;U+2014&gt;best known as The Film School&lt;U+2014&gt;encompasses one of the largest and best-equipped facilities devoted wholly to film education, while its undergraduate and graduate programs rank among the most highly regarded in the world.&quot; Retrieved on 7-01-2007. FSU Film students won more Student Oscars (2) and College Television Awards (5) in one year than any other film school.98 The college is one of the only film schools in the country to be recognized by the Directors Guild of America for &quot;its distinguished contribution to American culture through the world of film and television&quot;. It is also the only film school in the nation to pay for all undergraduate and graduate students production costs, creating an environment in which students can concentrate on the artistry of film.99 With the help of unusually active alumni and a mentorship program, virtually 100% of the students find a meaningful job in the film or television industries within 12 months.
College of Music
 The College of Music has been a fully accredited member of the National Association of Schools of Music since 1930. It currently has a student body of 650 undergraduate and 350 graduate students. The faculty of performing teachers and scholars numbers 85, with 225 graduate teaching and research assistants. Each year the College of Music offers more than 450 concerts and recitals featuring faculty members, students, guest artists, and ensembles of all sizes.100 The College of Music at FSU has been named the single most influential institution since 1990 in terms of published research in The Journal of Research in Music Education (JRME) according to a study by University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. That study found that more than 25 percent of the 418 articles published in JRME between 1990 and 2005 came from music educators who received their doctorates from FSU.101 The Warren D. Allen Music Library includes an extensive collection of over 150,000 scores, sound recordings (17,000 albums and over 13,000 CDs), video recordings, books, periodicals, and microforms. The library&lt;U+2019&gt;s special collections house many rare and unique items dating from as early as the 16th century.
College of Nursing
The FSU College of Nursing was founded in 1950 and is the first nationally accredited baccalaureate degree program in nursing in the state of Florida.102 A demanding program, incoming freshmen nursing students present a GPA of 4.0 or higher. Upper division students admitted to the College present a GPA average of 3.78. The College of Nursing has been approved by the Florida Board of Nursing since 1950. It has been accredited by the National League for Nursing since the first class graduated in 1952. The program is accredited by the Commission on Collegiate Nursing Education (CCNE). Approximately 72 undergraduate students are admitted to the BSN program at the College twice a year. Graduate programs include Nurse Practitioner and Nurse Educator programs.
Florida State Nursing graduates have a 97.8% passage rate on the state Nursing certification examination. One hundred percent of the College of Nursing's Advanced Nurse Practitioner master's degree graduates earn national specialty certification.103
College of Social Work
The School of Social Work is the oldest and most established in Florida. Degrees offered include the BSW, MSW, and PhD. The training and course of study offered is state of the art and reflects our commitment to community outreach and diversity. In U.S. News &amp; World Report's 2001 Graduate Rankings, FSU Social Work ranked in the top 15 among public universities and 25th among public and private universities. The College maintains relationships with over 300 social service agencies through Florida and the Southeast, including 18 Veterans Administration agencies to educate students through field instruction. A limited number of students also complete internships abroad. Faculty members have national recognition attained through their scholarly contributions and their leadership positions in professional community associations. A recent ranking published in the Chronicle of Higher Education (2007) ranked the College of Social Work PhD program 4th in the nation.
College of Social Sciences
The College of Social Sciences has been in existence since 1973. For over 30 years, professors and students alike have studied how people govern themselves, interact with others and the environment, and plan their surroundings. Social Sciences is still about these things today, giving students a breadth of knowledge about social systems, and opening the doors of an exciting and rewarding life.104 One of the new feature programs within the college is a Master's degree program in Geographic Information Systems (GIS) within the Geography Department.105
College of Visual Arts, Theatre And Dance
The College of Visual Arts, Theatre And Dance is one of the leading comprehensive theatre training programs in the United States. U.S. News and World Report has consistently included FSU's graduate theatre programs in the top-10, one of the few public university programs thus honored. The School is accredited by the National Association of Schools of Theatre and is a founding member of the University/Resident Theatre Association.
NHMFL logo
National High Magnetic Field Laboratory
The National High Magnetic Field Laboratory or &quot;Mag Lab&quot; at Florida State University develops and operates high magnetic field facilities that scientists use for research in physics, biology, bioengineering, chemistry, geochemistry, biochemistry, materials science, and engineering. It is the only facility of its kind in the United States and one of only nine in the world. Eight world records have been set at the Mag Lab to date.106
The laboratory at Florida State University is a 30,658 square meter (330,000 sq. ft.) complex and has approximately 300 faculty, staff, graduate, and postdoctoral students. The NHMFL is the only national laboratory in the State of Florida and one of nine high field laboratories in the world. This facility is the largest and highest powered laboratory of its kind in the world and produces the highest continuous magnetic fields.107
The facility at FSU is powered by a 40 million watt (MW) power supply that is highly regulated and represents 10 percent of Tallahassee's total electrical generating capability. The complex has an extensive water-chilling plant that stores 1 million gallons of chilled water and is capable of producing 8,000 tons of ice per day. Four chilling towers are adjacent to the chilling plant. FSU, joining with the University of Florida in a peer-reviewed competition, won the laboratory from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) in 1990.
Student housing
Florida State University is a traditional residential university wherein most students live on campus in university residence halls or nearby in privately-owned residence halls, apartments and residences. Florida State currently has 17 residence halls on campus, housing undergraduate and graduate students. Graduate and married students may live in university owned off-campus housing. The residence halls range from renovated buildings built during the early 1900s to brand-new facilities. On-campus housing is generally preferred by many students as automobile parking on or near campus can become a competitive effort. Students typically dine in university-contracted campus dining facilities (provided by Aramark), as well as commercial restaurants that are located on and near campus. Many students also prepare their own meals in residence hall kitchens. Some residence halls require students to participate in a campus meal plan. All rooms at Florida State have high-speed Internet access as such is required for students to complete university academic and administrative requirements. Students who are members of the active university Greek Life system at FSU may live in chapter housing near campus.108
Satellite campuses
College of Medicine - regional campuses
The Florida State University College of Medicine operates using diversified community-based clinical education medical training for medical students. During the third and fourth years, medical students complete required rotations at one of the six regional campuses in Daytona Beach, FL, Fort Pierce, FL, Orlando, FL, Pensacola, FL, Sarasota, FL and Tallahassee.109
Panama City campus
Florida State University offers upper-division undergraduate courses as well as some graduate and specialist degree programs at the Panama City campus, located in the North Bay area of Panama City, FL. Courses are taught by faculty members from the main FSU campus.
Panama City, Republic of Panama
For over 50 years Florida State University has operated a broad curriculum program in Panama City of the Republic of Panama.110 Students have full facilities, including the largest English-language library in the Republic of Panama, academic counseling, computer facilities, housing, research facilities, a gymnasium, and a cafeteria. The student population is generally international and comes from the United States, the Republic of Panama and other countries.
Other international campuses and programs
Florida State University operates international campuses in Florence, Italy111; London, England112 and Valencia, Spain113. It also offers several international programs abroad, located in countries from Australia to Switzerland.114
Athletics
The school is widely known for its prestigious athletic department for both mens and womens sports. The men's program consists of baseball, basketball, cross country running, football, golf, swimming, tennis, and track &amp; field. The women's program consists of basketball, cross country running, golf, soccer, softball, swimming, tennis, track &amp; field, and volleyball. There are two separate stadiums and an arena within FSU's main campus; Doak Campbell Stadium for football, Dick Howser Stadium for baseball, and the Donald L. Tucker Center for basketball. Florida State also has very large Sports Club and Intramural Sports programs.115 Sports clubs range from equestrian to water sailing which compete against other Intercollegiate club teams around the country. Intramural sports include flag football, basketball, wiffleball, dodgeball and many more. Intramural sports are friendly competition between Seminoles.
Seminoles - an unconquered people
The school's athletic teams are called the Seminoles. This Native American name is used with official sanction of the Seminole Tribe of Florida, Inc. and the Seminole Nation of Oklahoma. They participate in the NCAA's Division I (Division I-A for football) and in the Atlantic Coast Conference. Their traditional rivals include the University of Florida Gators and the University of Miami Hurricanes.
Under head coach Bobby Bowden, currently in his 31st year, the Seminole football team became one of the nation's perennial powers, greatly expanding the tradition of football at Florida State.116 The Seminoles played in five national championship games between 1993 and 2001, and have claimed the championship twice, in 1993 and 1999 . The FSU football team was the most successful team in college football during the 1990s, boasting an 89% winning percentage. FSU also set an NCAA record for most consecutive Top 5 finishes in the AP football poll - receiving placement 14 years in a row, from 1987 to 2000. The Seminoles were the first college football team in history to go wire-to-wire (ranked first place from preseason to postseason) since the AP began releasing preseason rankings in 1936. FSU also owns the record for most consecutive Bowl game victories with 11 between 1985 and 1996.117
FSU head coach Bobby Bowden is the Division I college football coach leader in the NCAA with 366 career wins, followed by Penn State's Joe Paterno with 363. FSU football is well-known for introducing talented players into the NFL, including Deion Sanders, Terrell Buckley, Derrick Brooks, Sebastian Janikowski, Walter Jones, Corey Simon, Anquan Boldin, Javon Walker, Warrick Dunn, Peter Boulware, Laverneus Coles, Brad Johnson, Samari Rolle, and many other players in recent history.
In 2006, the FSU men's Track &amp; Field team won the Atlantic Coast Conference championship, the NCAA East Regional championship and the NCAA National Championship. Head Coach Bob Braman and Associate Head Coach Harlis Meaders helped lead individual champions in the 200 m (Walter Dix), the triple jump (Raqeef Curry), and the shot put (Garrett Johnson). Individual runners-up were Walter Dix in the 100 m, Ricardo Chambers in the 400 m, and Tom Lancashire in the 1500 m. Others scoring points in the National Championship were Michael Ray Garvin in the 200 m (8th),Andrew Lemoncello in the 3000 m steeplechase (4th), Raqeef Curry in the long jump (6th), and Garrett Johnson in the discus (5th).118 In 2007, FSU won its second straight men's Track &amp; Field NCAA National Championship when Dix became the first person to hold the individual title in the 100 m, 200 m, and 400 m at the same time.119
Traditions
The school's colors are Garnet and Gold. The colors of Garnet and Gold represent a merging of the University's past. While the school fielded a football team as early, or earlier than 1899120, in 1902, 1903 and 1905 the team won football championships wearing purple and gold uniforms.121122 When FSC became Florida State College for Women in 1905, the football team and fraternity system was forced to attend the now all male school in Gainesville, thus marking the beginning of the football program at the University of Florida.123 The following year, the college student body selected crimson as the official school color. The administration in 1905 took crimson and combined it with the recognizable purple of the championship football teams to achieve the color garnet. When football returned to the school about 42 years later the now famous Garnet and Gold colors were first used on an FSU uniform in a 14-6 loss to Stetson University on October 18, 1947. 
FSU is also the home of the esteemed Marching Chiefs, the largest collegiate marching band in the world. The Marching Chiefs are the force behind the famous &quot;War Chant&quot;124. The War Chant is believed to be a version of another song chanted first during the 1960s.125 
School songs
Alma Mater - High Over Towering Pines: High over towering pines our voices swell, Praising those Gothic spires, we love so well. Here sons and daughters stand, faithful and true, Hailing our alma mater, F.S.U.
Hymn to the Garnet and Gold: Here's a hymn to the Garnet and the Gold, ringing to the sky. Here's a song for the men and women bold. Sing with heads held high. Striving ere to seek to know, Fight for victory. Alma Mater, this our song to you. Echoes, F.S.U.
FSU Fight Song You've got to fight, fight, fight, for FSU, You've got to scalp 'em Seminoles, You've got to win, win, win, win this game, And roll on down to make those goals, For FSU is on the warpath now, and at the battle's end she's great. So fight, fight, fight, fight for victory, the Seminoles of Florida State! F-L-O-R-I-D-A S-T-A-T-E! Florida State, Florida State, Florida State, Woooo!
The fight song was written by Florida State music professor, Thomas Wright, who owns the rights to the song.126 Wright allows FSU to use the Fight Song every year in exchange for two season tickets.127 According to Wright, the Native American profile often used as a symbol of FSU was also based on the profile of his face.
The 1950 Florida State University Homecoming half-time show included a dedication ceremony naming the stadium in honor of university President Doak Campbell. There was also a special performance by the band, christening it the Marching Chiefs and premiering the Florida State University Fight Song.
Fifty years later, the FSU Fight Song is one of the most widely recognized college tunes in the country. Mission Control awakened alumnus and current professor Norm Thagard, with the Fight Song one morning in 1983 while he was aboard the Challenger spacecraft.
Campus media
Print media
The FSView &amp; Florida Flambeau is the campus newspaper of Florida State University in Tallahassee, Florida. The paper focuses mainly on events that occur in and around the university. Most national news is relegated to a &quot;News Briefs&quot; section on the front page, below the fold. The paper publishes editions weekly during the summer and semiweekly on Mondays and Thursdays during the school year. The sections include News, Sports, Arts &amp; Life, Classifieds, and Viewpoints, which includes an editorial cartoon, &quot;Ink Globally, Act Locally&quot; by cartoonist Mandy Newham. Special sections include NightLife, Bon Apetite, Rush and Dining Guide.
After changing hands three times in 13 years, the FSView was sold to the Tallahassee Democrat in late July 2006, making it part of the Gannett chain.
The FSView's production staff is also responsible for Edge Magazine. Edge Magazine consists of articles geared towards students, advertisements for local establishments, and a &quot;Tally Girl&quot; model.
Radio and television
 Florida State University, through its Broadcast Center, operates two television stations, WFSU and WFSG,128 and three radio stations, WFSU-FM, WFSQ-FM and WFSW-FM.129 All are affiliated with the Public Broadcasting Service (PBS) and National Public Radio (NPR).
FSU operates a fourth radio station known as WVFS. WVFS is often referred to as V89, &quot;The Voice&quot;, or &quot;The Voice of Florida State&quot; is an instructional radio station located on the campus of Florida State University.130 WVFS is staffed by student and community volunteers. Featuring no automation, the DJ or operator booth at WVFS is manned 24 hours a day, 365 days a year. New and experimental music is played to provide an alternative to regular radio. WVFS broadcasts at 89.7 FM.
Past presidents
Before 1887 the chief executive officer at the institution was titled Principal.131 With the appointment of George Edgar in 1887, the title was changed to President. Prior to 1877 the Male Department of the West Florida Seminary had a male Principal and the Female Department a female Principal. These positions were combined into one with the appointment of James D. Wade as chief executive of the entire institution in 1877.
Talbot D'Alemberte 1994-2003
Dale W. Lick 1991-1994
Bernard F. Sliger1976-1991
Stanley Marshall 1969-1976
John E. Champion 1965-1969
Gordon W. Blackwell 1960-1965
Milton W. Carothers 1960
Robert M. Strozier 1957-1960
Albert B. Martin 1957
Doak S. Campbell 1947-1957
Edward Conradi 1909-1941
Albert A. Murphree 1897-1909
Alvin Lewis 1892-1897
George Edgar 1887-1892
James D. Wade, Principal 1877-18?
Susan Bythewood, Principal, Female Department 1875-1877
James D. Wade, Principal, Male Department 1873-1877
Susan S. Williams, Principal, Female Department 1873-1875
Notable faculty
The faculty of Florida State University include winners of the Nobel Prize, the Pulitzer Prize, Guggenheim Fellowships and other awards. Florida State is represented by faculty serving in a number of renowned Academies, Associations and Societies. Some FSU faculty members have won Academy Awards (also known as Oscars).132
Notable alumni
Florida State University has more than 250,000 alumni worldwide represented by 68 or more official clubs133, 11 Constituent Groups134 and many informal groups and associations.
Florida State University seeks to protect its history through the FSU Heritage Protocol whose mission is &quot;to locate, identify, record, assist in the preservation of, and promote knowledge about the heritage of Florida State University and its predecessor institutions. Students, faculty, staff, administrators, alumni, and friends have expressed this heritage through published, unpublished, audio, and visual materials, memorabilia and ceremonial objects.&quot;135
Notable alumini/athletes
As a major competitor in college athletics, Florida State University has many notable student athletes, coaches and staff members. Many of the most notable members are listed in FSU's Hall of Fame and represent all major collegiate sports.136 Some of the best athletes compete as professionals after collegiate competition. Currently, 75 FSU alumni compete in professional basketball, football, baseball and golf.137
Notes and references
Further reading
Books
Adams, Alfred Hugh (1962) A History of Public Higher Education in Florida, 1821&lt;U+2011&gt;1961, Doctoral dissertation, Florida State University.
Bush, George G. (1889) History of Education in Florida, U.S. Bureau of Education, Circular of Information 1888, # 7, Washington, D.C.
Campbell, Doak Sheridan (1964) A University in Transition: Florida State College for Women and Florida State University, 1941&lt;U+2011&gt;1957, Florida State University.
Dodd, William George (1948) Early Education in Tallahassee and the West Florida Seminary, Now Florida State University, Florida Historical Quarterly, XXVII, 1&lt;U+2011&gt;27.
Dodd, William George (1952) History of West Florida Seminary, Florida State University, ASIN: B0007E7WRS
Dodd, William George (1952) West Florida Seminary, 1857&lt;U+2011&gt;1901; Florida State College, 1901&lt;U+2011&gt;1905, Tallahassee: n.p.
Dodd, William George 1958-1959) Florida State College for Women, Notes on the Formative Years (1905&lt;U+2011&gt;1920)&lt;U+2011&gt;&lt;U+2011&gt;With a Postscript: The Twenties; and Epilogue: The Forties 1940&lt;U+2011&gt;1944, Tallalahassee: n.p.
McGrotha, Bill (1987) Seminoles! The First Forty Years, Tallahassee Democrat, ISBN 0-9613040-1-4
Sellers, Robin Jeanne (1995) Femina perfecta: The genesis of Florida State University, FSU Foundation, ISBN-10: 0964837412 ISBN-13: 978-0964837416
External links
Florida State University (main website)
Florida State University - Official History
:* Exploring FSU's Past: A Public History Project, Fall 2006
FSU Alumni Association
:*Heritage Protocol at Florida State University
FSU Athletics
FSU Tribute to the Seminole Tribe
FSU Fight Song (audio link)
FSU Flying High Circus
FSU 2007 Holocaust Institute for Educators
FSU Institute on World War II and the Human Experience
FSU News
FSView and Florida Flambeau website
National High Magnetic Field Laboratory
Phi Beta Kappa
Seminole Tribe of Florida
Seminole Nation of Oklahoma
State Archives of Florida
World Affairs Program, FSU Model United Nations
WFSU Radio and Television
WVFS Student Radio Station
de:Florida State University es:Universidad Estatal de Florida ja:&lt;U+30D5&gt;&lt;U+30ED&gt;&lt;U+30EA&gt;&lt;U+30C0&gt;&lt;U+5DDE&gt;&lt;U+7ACB&gt;&lt;U+5927&gt;&lt;U+5B66&gt;
  Category:Music schools in the United States Category:Public universities Category:Universities and colleges in Florida Category:Tallahassee, Florida Category:Oak Ridge Associated Universities Category:Educational institutions established in 1851
9 FSU 2006-2007 General Bulletin Undergraduate Edition Retrieved on 4-28-2007.
10 ''The Carnegie Foundation...Classifications '' Retrieved on 4-28-2007.
11 Florida State University - Colleges, Schools, Departments, Institutes, and Administrative Units, Centers, Facilities, Labs &amp; Institutes Retrieved on 5-12-2007
12 FSU Pathways of Excellence Ph.D. Programs Retrieved on 4-28-2007
14 State Library and Archives of Florida - The Florida Memory Project Timeline (see 1851) Retrieved on 4-28-2007
15 USA Today - August 30 2006, 2006 College Tuition and Fees Survey Retrieved on 4-28-2007.
16 Text of speech given by Robert M. Berdahl, Chancellor of UC Berkeley on October 5 1998 at Texas A&amp;M University - &quot;Many of what we now call the flagship campuses were established in the extraordinary period of university building that took place in the United States in the roughly three decades from the mid-1850s to the mid-1880s. Many came into being after the Morrill Act of 1863 provided the federal grants of land to the states to establish public universities. Some states built two institutions, a land-grant college focused on agriculture and the &quot;mechanical arts&quot; as well as general education, and another more directed at classical education and the other professions...These institutions formed the core of the public systems of higher education in their respective states.&quot; Retrieved on 4-28-2007.
17 FSU 2006-2007 General Bulletin Undergraduate Edition Retrieved on 4-28-2007.
18 Florida State University Sesquicentennial Celebration, Welcome Retrieved on 5-08-2007
19 Florida State University - College Highlights and Selected National Rankings Retrieved on 5-01-2007.
20 History of Florida State University, Office of the Dean of the Faculties, September 5, 2001 Retrieved on 4-29-2007.
21 State Library and Archives of Florida - The Florida Memory Project, Florida Constitution of 1838, Article X - Education: &quot;Section 1. The proceeds of all lands that have been or may hereafter be granted by the United States for the use of Schools, and a Seminary or Seminaries, of learning, shall be and remain a perpetual fund, the interest of which, together with all monies derived from any other source applicable to the same object, shall be inviolably appropriated to the use of Schools and Seminaries of learning respectively, and to no other purpose. Section 2. The General Assembly shall take such measures as may be necessary to preserve from waste or damage all land so granted and appropriated to the purposes of Education. &quot; Retrieved on 5-25-2007
22 State Library and Archives of Florida - The Florida Memory Project Timeline (see 1851) Retrieved on 4-28-2007
23 State Library and Archives of Florida - Florida Photographic Collection, Original building of the all male Florida Institute, one predecessor of the West Florida Seminary. Archives metadata: The male academy. Built in 1854, by the city, as an inducement for the legislature to name Tallahassee as the site of the Seminary West of the Suwanee. Operated as the Florida Institute until it became West Florida Seminary in 1857. Retrieved on 4-29-2007.
24 State Library and Archives of Florida - Florida Photographic Collection, Tallahassee Female Academy circa 187-. Archives metadata: A female academy. West Florida Seminary building on Park Avenue between Duval and Bronough Streets, Tallahassee, Florida Retrieved on 4-29-2007.
25 Florida State University Libraries - John L. DeMilly Papers 1877-1879, Historical Note Retrieved on 4-28-2007.
26 State Library and Archives of Florida - Florida Photographic Collection, Map showing location of the West Florida Seminary published 1885. Archives metadata: No. 3 was the seminary. Built in 1854. In use 1857, when classes began, until 1891 when it was remolded to College Hall. Retrieved on 4-29-2007.
27 State Library and Archives of Florida - Florida Photographic Collection, West Florida Seminary circa 1884. Archives metadata: Building given to the seminary at its inception (1857) for classes. Destroyed in 1891 to make way for College Hall. Retrieved on 4-29-2007.
28 State Library and Archives of Florida - Florida Photographic Collection, College Hall at the West Florida Seminary circa 1898. Archives metadata: Constructed in 1891. Replaced by Westcott in 1909. Retrieved on 4-29-2007.
29 Text adapted from _Historic Gainesville, A Tour Guide to the Past_, Ben Pickard, ed., Historic Gainesville, Inc., Gainesville, FL, 1991, 48 pp. Copyright by Historic Gainesville, Inc. Retrieved on 4-29-2007.
30 State Library and Archives of Florida - The Florida Memory Project Timeline (see 1865) Retrieved on 4-29-2007
31 State Library and Archives of Florida - Florida Photographic Collection, West Florida Seminary Cadets, published circa 187-. Archive metadata: West Florida Seminary cadets taking a break Retrieved on 4-29-2007
32 History of Florida State University, Office of the Dean of the Faculties, September 5, 2001 - &quot;The following quote from the 1903 Florida State College Catalogue adds an interesting footnote to this period: In 1883 the institution, now long officially known as the West Florida Seminary, was organized by the Board of Education as The Literary College of the University of Florida. Owing to lack of means for the support of this more ambitious project, and also owing to the fact that soon thereafter schools for technical training were established, this association soon dissolved. It remains to be remarked, however, that the legislative act passed in 1885, bestowing upon the institution the title of the University of Florida, has never been repealed. The more pretentious name is not assumed by the college owing to the fact that it does not wish to misrepresent its resources and purposes.&quot; Retrieved on 4-29-2007.
33 History of Florida State University, Office of the Dean of the Faculties, September 5, 2001 Retrieved on 4-29-2007.
34 State Library and Archives of Florida - Florida Photographic Collection, Westcott Building at the Florida State College for Women, published 193-. Archives metadata: Fountain and Westcott Building at Florida State College for Women. Retrieved on 4-29-2007.
35 ''Shira Birnbaum, &quot;Making Southern belles in progressive era Florida: Gender in the formal and hidden curriculum of the Florida Female College&quot;, p. 7, Frontiers: A Journal of Women Studies, Vol. 16, No. 2/3, Gender, Nations, and Nationalisms (1996), pp. 218-246 doi:10.2307/3346809'' Retrieved on 7-02-2007.
36 ''Shira Birnbaum, &quot;Making Southern belles in progressive era Florida: Gender in the formal and hidden curriculum of the Florida Female College&quot;, p. 8, Frontiers: A Journal of Women Studies, Vol. 16, No. 2/3, Gender, Nations, and Nationalisms (1996), pp. 218-246 doi:10.2307/3346809'' Retrieved on 7-02-2007.
37 Florida State University - Campus Map Retrieved on 7-02-2007.
38 Florida State University - Women and Science at FSU Retrieved on 7-02-2007.
39 Florida State University Libraries Special Collections Department, Inventory of the Florida State College for Women Surveys and Reports (MSS2003003), Biographical/Historical Notes. Created by Amy McDonald. Copyright Florida State University Libraries, 2004 Retrieved on 4-30-2007.
40 Alpha of Florida - Phi Beta Kappa Retrieved on 4-29-2007.
41 Phi Beta Kappa - Chronology of Chapters Retrieved on 5-23-2007.
42 Florida State University Libraries Special Collections Department, Inventory of the Florida State College for Women/Florida State University Phi Beta Kappa Alpha of Florida Chapter. (MSS2005-014) Biographical/Historical Notes. Created by Erin VanClay, Copyright Florida State University Libraries, 09/2005 Retrieved on 4-30-2007.
43 History of Florida State University, Office of the Dean of the Faculties, September 5, 2001 Retrieved on 4-29-2007.
44 State Library and Archives of Florida - Florida Photographic Collection, Tallahassee Branch of the University of Florida at the Florida State College for Women circa 1946. Archives metadata: The first 507 students went to register for the TBUF program, 1946-47. They were enrolled at Florida State College for Women in 1946. TBUF was created to serve men returning from World War II because there was no room at the state men's college, the University of Florida. They were the first men on campus since 1905. Retrieved on 4-30-2007.
45 Personal history of Mary Lou Norwood, FSCW/FSU Alumna, (transitional) Class of 1947 (FSU webpage): &quot;She graduated in the transitional class of 1947, when FSCW became the coeducational Florida State University. She was a member of the only class for which both institutional names appear on the diploma.&quot; Retrieved on 4-30-2007.
46 Florida State University, News Archive, Events Retrieved on 4-30-2007.
47 ''Florida State Times - On-Line, April/May 1997 - Compression (&lt;U+00A9&gt;1997 Florida State Times): &quot;Streaking an FSU First - One of the more notorious fads of the 1970s began on the campus of Florida State. Streaking, which swept the nation in the 1970s, was started in 1974 when about 200 FSU students decided to run naked across the campus one mild March evening.&quot; '' Retrieved on 6-29-2007.
48 ''Tallahassee Naturally, Inc. (&lt;U+00A9&gt;2005 by Tallahassee Naturally, Inc. All rights reserved): &quot;January 15, 1974 was a slow day at the Florida Flambeau. So the editor persuaded four male FSU students to streak naked across Woodward Avenue and the tennis courts, on into a waiting getaway car. Within weeks, the streaking fad had spread across campuses nationwide. To uphold their record as Number 1, FSU students staged mass nude evening rallies in front of the library. But the fad quickly passed, and everyone forgot that it had started in Tallahassee.&quot; '' Retrieved on 6-29-2007.
49 Florida State University, Center for Participant Education Retrieved on 4-30-2007.
50 Florida State University Factbook 2006-07 - Site and Acreage Holdings Retrieved on 4-30-2007.
51 Jeff Bauer - A History of Supercomputing at Florida State University, 1991 Retrieved on 4-30-2007.
52 Florida State University - Pathways of Excellence Retrieved on 5-27-2007.
53 Florida State University - Pathways of Excellence Round 2 Academic Cluster Proposals Retrieved on 5-27-2007.
54 Florida State University - Pathways of Excellence, New Facilities Retrieved on 5-27-2007.
55 Florida State University - About FSU's Students Retrieved on 4-30-2007.
56 Florida State University - About FSU's Students Retrieved on 4-30-2007.
57 Florida State University - Student Strengths and Outcomes Retrieved on 5-20-2007.
58 Tallahassee Democrat, &quot;Getting into college is harder to do&quot; originally published 4/30/2007, By Jennifer Jefferson, Democrat Staff Writer Retrieved on 4-30-2007.
60 FSU 2006-2007 General Bulletin Undergraduate Edition - Limited Access Programs Retrieved on 4-30-2007.
61 Tallahassee Democrat - Young Scholars Get Ahead at FSU Camp Retrieved on 6-20-2007.
62 Young Scholars Program @ FSU Retrieved on 5-26-2007.
63 The Kiplinger Washington Editors - Kiplinger.com, Best Values in Public Colleges (&lt;U+00A9&gt; 2007) Retrieved on 5-01-2007.
64 USA Today - August 30 2006, 2006 College Tuition and Fees Survey Retrieved on 4-28-2007.
65 Shanghai Jiao Tong University - Institute of Higher Education, Academic Ranking of World Universities 2006 Retrieved on 5-01-2007.
66 US News and World Report, America's Best Colleges 2007, National Universities: Top Schools Retrieved on 5-01-2007.
67 Florida State University - Performance Indicators/Comparisons, Peers, ACC and Selected Universities 2005 Retrieved on 5-01-2007.
68 Florida State University - College Highlights and Selected National Rankings Retrieved on 5-01-2007.
69 Florida State University - FSU.com/EverythingFSU.com, FSU a national beacon for Hispanic students By Molly Smith. Published Feb. 07, 2007 Retrieved on 5-01-2007.
70 Title XLVIII, 1004.45(2)(a) 2006 Florida Statutes Retrieved on 5-02-2007.
72 John and Mable Ringling Museum of Art - Main webpage, Welcome to the Ringling Estate Retrieved on 5-02-2007.
73 Museum of Fine Arts at Florida State University Retrieved on 5-26-2007.
74 Florida State University - Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Laser Facility Equipment Data Retrieved on 5-03-2007.
75 ''Florida State University, Research in Review, Fall 2002 '' Retrieved on 5-03-2007.
St. Petersburg Times, April 30, 2004, &quot;From Campus to Commerce&quot; by Robert Trigeaux Retrieved on 5-03-2007.76
77 Sarasota Herald Tribune &quot;Audit to Review Computer Code&quot; by Carol E. Lee, December 5, 2006 Retrieved on 5-08-2007.
78 Florida State University Statement of Work &quot;Software Review and Security Analysis for ES&amp;S iVotronic Voting Machine Firmware&quot; December 15, 2006 Retrieved on 5-08-2007.
79 Florida State University, English Department, Creative Writing Retrieved on 5-03-2007.
80 ''Florida State University Meteorology Department, Academic Programs webpage '' Retrieved on 5-03-2007.
81 Florida State University - College Highlights and Selected National Rankings Retrieved on 5-01-2007.
82 Florida State University 2007-2008 General Bulletin Undergraduate Edition, College of Arts and Sciences, Department of Meteorology Retrieved on 5-01-2007.
83 Florida State University - College Highlights and Selected National Rankings Retrieved on 5-01-2007.
84 Florida State University College of Business, Fast Facts &amp; Rankings Retrieved on 5-03-2007.
85 Florida State University College of Business, Marketing Faculty Ranking Retrieved on 5-03-2007.
86 BusinessWeek - Undergraduate Rankings, Sorted by Placement Performance (Copyright 2000-2007 by The McGraw-Hill Companies Inc. All rights reserved.) Retrieved on 5-03-2007.
87 ''Business School Research Productivity Rankings 1986-1997, Alan R. Dennis, Professor and John T. Chambers Chair of Internet Systems, Department of Information Systems, Kelley School of Business, Indiana University, Bloomington IN 47405 '' Retrieved on 5-03-2007.
88 Florida State University College of Business, Accounting Rankings Retrieved on 5-03-2007.
89 Florida State University College of Business, Dedman School of Hospitality Retrieved on 5-04-2007.
90 Florida State University - College Highlights and Selected National Rankings Retrieved on 5-01-2007.
91 Florida State University College of Criminology and Criminal Justice Retrieved on 5-07-2007.
92 ''Florida State University College of Criminology and Criminal Justice - Center for Criminology and Public Policy Research '' Retrieved on 5-07-2007.
93 State Library and Archives of Florida - Florida Photographic Collection, State Normal College for Teachers, circa 1897. Archive metadata: One of two colleges set up in 1887 for the education of teachers. The other was the State Normal and Industrial College in Tallahassee. Biographical note: This college relocated to Tallahassee in 1904 and merged with the Florida State College for Women (later Florida State University). Retrieved on 5-27-2007.
94 Florida State University - College Highlights and Selected National Rankings Retrieved on 5-01-2007.
95 Florida State University - College of Education, Departments and Programs Retrieved on 5-26-2007.
96 Florida State University - College of Human Sciences - Fast Facts Retrieved on 5-26-2007.
97 Florida State University - College Highlights and Selected National Rankings Retrieved on 5-01-2007.
98 Florida State University - College Highlights and Selected National Rankings Retrieved on 5-01-2007.
99 U.S. News and World Report, America's Best Graduate Schools 2008 - Top Law Schools Retrieved on 5-07-2007.
100 U.S. News and World Report, America's Best Graduate Schools 2008 - Top Law Schools Retrieved on 5-07-2007.
101 &lt;U+00A9&gt;Florida State University - FSU News(September 19, 2006): FSU Law grads No. 1 in passing Florida Bar; college tops ranks for Hispanic students Retrieved on 5-07-2007.
102 Sarasota Memorial Health Care System, News Release dated July 13, 2006. Retrieved on 5-07-2007.
103 Florida State University College of Medicine Affiliated Institutions - Sarasota Retrieved on 5-07-2007.
104 Florida State University - Florida State University 2007-2008 General Bulletin Undergraduate Edition, College of Motion Picture, Television, and Recording Arts: &quot;Admission to the College of Motion Picture, Television, and Recording Arts is limited access, making admission highly selective and competitive. Approximately 30 students, comprising freshmen and transfer applicants, are admitted each fall as film majors.&quot; Retrieved on 7-01-2007.
106 Florida State University - College Highlights and Selected National Rankings Retrieved on 5-01-2007.
107 Florida State University Film School - Video presentation by actor Richard Belzer Retrieved on 6-18-2007.
108 Florida State University - College of Music, &quot;About the College&quot; Retrieved on 5-08-2007.
109 Florida State University website - FSU News: &quot;Recent study calls FSU College of Music 'most influential'&quot; Retrieved on 5-31-2007.
110 Florida State University - College of Nursing &quot;Welcome&quot; webpage Retrieved on 5-27-2007.
111 Florida State University - College Highlights and Selected National Rankings Retrieved on 5-01-2007.
112 Florida State University - College of Social Science, &quot;About Us&quot; Retrieved on 5-08-2007.
113 Florida State University - College of Social Science, Department of Geography Retrieved on 5-08-2007.
114 National High Magnetic Field Laboratory - Media Center Fact Sheets - Records Retrieved on 5-23-2007.
115 National High Magnetic Field Laboratory - About the Magnet Lab at Florida State University Retrieved on 5-23-2007.
116 Florida State University - Office of Greek Life Retrieved on 5-08-2007.
117 Florida State University College of Medicine, &quot;About the College&quot; Retrieved on 5-11-2007.
118 Florida State University - Panama City, Republic of Panama campus&quot; Retrieved on 5-28-2007.
119 Florida State University - Florence, Italy Retrieved on 5-28-2007.
120 Florida State University - London, England Retrieved on 5-28-2007.
121 Florida State University - Valencia, Spain Retrieved on 5-28-2007.
122 Florida State University - International Programs Retrieved on 5-28-2007.
123 Florida State University, Campus Recreation - Sport Clubs Retrieved on 5-08-2007.
124 Florida State University, Seminoles.com - Official Site of FSU Athletics, Profile: Bobby Bowden Retrieved on 6-30-2007.
125 Florida State University, Seminoles.com - Official Site of FSU Athletics, Profile: Bobby Bowden Retrieved on 6-30-2007.
126 Florida State University, Student Profiles - Garrett Johnson Retrieved on 5-08-2007.
127 Seminoles.com website - Track &amp; Field: FSU Wins Back-to-Back National Titles Retrieved on 6-09-2007.
128 State Library and Archives of Florida - Florida Photographic Collection, West Florida Seminary Football Team at College Hall, published 1899 Retrieved on 4-29-2007.
129 History of Florida State University, Office of the Dean of the Faculties, September 5, 2001 Retrieved on 4-29-2007.
130 The Argo of the Seminary West of the Suwanee, Tallahassee, FL (circa 1900), page 28 (image 33) Retrieved on 5-08-2007.
131 Florida State University Sesquicentennial Celebration 1851-2001, History 1851-1905 Student Life Retrieved on 4-29-2007
132 YouTube video clip, 36 second clip posted by fsu17 on 9/17/2006 - FSU War Chant Retrieved on 5-11-2007.
133 Florida State University, University Relations, FSU Seminole Traditions - War Chant Retrieved on 5-11-2007.
134 Florida State University - Fight Song (lyrics by Doug Alley, music by Thomas Wright) Retrieved on 5-25-2007.
135 The History of the War Chant Retrieved on 5-25-2007.
136 ''Florida State University - Television Stations WFSU and WFSG '' Retrieved on 5-28-2007.
137 Florida State University - Radio Stations WFSU-FM, WFSQ-FM and WFSW-FM Retrieved on 5-28-2007
138 Florida State University - Radio Station WVFS-FM Retrieved on 5-28-2007.
139 Florida State University Libraries - John L. DeMilly Papers 1877-1879, Historical Note Retrieved on 4-28-2007.
140 Florida State University - Faculty Honors and Awards Retrieved on 7-01-2007.
141 Florida State University, Alumni Association - Seminole Clubs Retrieved on 7-01-2007.
142 Florida State University, Alumni Association - Constituent Groups Retrieved on 7-01-2007.
143 Florida State University, Alumni Association - Heritage Protocol Mission Statement Retrieved on 7-01-2007.
144 Florida State University, Seminoles.Com website for FSU Athletics - FSU Hall of Fame Retrieved on 7-01-2007.
145 Florida State University, Seminoles.Com website for FSU Athletics - Noles in the Pros Retrieved on 7-01-2007.
