The Mauritius Blue Pigeon (Alectroenas nitidissima) is an extinct species of blue pigeon formerly endemic to the Mascarene island of Mauritius in the Indian Ocean east of Madagascar. It has two extinct relatives from the Mascarenes and three extant ones from other islands.
It had white hackles around the head, neck and breast and blue plumage on the body, and it was red on the tail and the bare parts of the head. These colours were thought similar to those of the Dutch flag, a resemblance reflected in some of the bird's names. It was 30 cm (12 in) long and larger and more robust than any other blue pigeon species. It could raise its hackles into a ruff, which it used for display. Its call sounded like &quot;barf barf&quot; and it also made a cooing noise. It fed on fruits, nuts, and molluscs, and was once widespread in the forests of Mauritius.
The bird was first mentioned in the 17th century and was described several times thereafter, but very few accounts describe the behaviour of living specimens. Several stuffed and at least one live specimen reached Europe in the 1700s and 1800s. Only three stuffed specimens exist today, and only one bird was ever depicted when alive. The species is thought to have become extinct in the 1830s as a result of deforestation and predation.
Taxonomy and etymology
 The first record of the Mauritius Blue Pigeon is two sketches in the 1601&lt;U+2013&gt;1603 journal of the Dutch ship Gelderland. The birds appear to have been freshly killed or stunned. The drawings were made by the Dutch artist Joris Joostensz Laerle on Mauritius, but were not published until 1969. Fran&lt;U+00E7&gt;ois Cauche in 1651 briefly mentions &quot;white, black and red turtle doves&quot;, encountered in 1638, which is thought to be the first unequivocal mention of the bird. The next account is that of Joseph Fran&lt;U+00E7&gt;ois Charpentier de Cossigny in the mid-1700s.
Pierre Sonnerat brought the bird to the attention of ornithologists in 1782, calling it Pigeon Hollandais (Dutch Pigeon), a French vernacular name that derives from its white, dark blue and red colouration, which reminded Sonnerat of the Dutch flag. He had collected two specimens during a voyage in 1774. These syntype specimens were deposited in the Mus&lt;U+00E9&gt;um national d'Histoire naturelle in Paris, where they were later damaged by sulphuric acid fumes; by 1893, only one of them still existed. Since Sonnerat named and described them in French, the scientific naming of the bird was left to Giovanni Antonio Scopoli, who did not observe a specimen himself, but latinised Sonnerat's description. He named the bird Columba nitidissima, which means &quot;most brilliant pigeon&quot;. When Johann Friedrich Gmelin redescribed the bird with the species name franciae (&quot;of France&quot;) in 1789, he referred to the now-familiar tricolour which had just been flown for the first time. Pierre Joseph Bonnaterre used the name batavica (&quot;the Dutch one&quot;) in his redescription in 1790. Another skin arrived at the Paris museum in 1800, collected by Colonel M. Mathieu for Louis Dufresne. It was sold in 1819 among other items, was sent to Edinburgh, and is now in the National Museum of Scotland. It was not identified as a Mauritius Blue Pigeon until Alfred Newton saw it in 1879. The last specimen recorded was shot in Savanne in 1826 and given to Julien Desjardins, founder of the Mauritius Natural History Museum in Port Louis, where it is still located, though in poor condition. Only these three taxidermic specimens still survive.
In 1840 George Robert Gray named a new genus, Alectroenas, for the Mauritius Blue Pigeon; alektruon in Greek means domestic cock, and oinas means dove. Alectroenas nitidissima is the type species of the genus, which includes all blue pigeons.
Subfossil remains of the Mauritius Blue Pigeon were collected in the Mare aux Songes swamp by Th&lt;U+00E9&gt;odore Sauzier in 1889. More were collected by Etienne Thirioux around 1900. They are thought to have been found near Le Pouce and Plaine des Roches.
Evolution
Alectroenas blue pigeons are closely interrelated and occur widely throughout islands in the western Indian Ocean. They are allopatric and can therefore be regarded as a superspecies. There are three extant species: the Madagascar Blue Pigeon, the Comoro Blue Pigeon, and the Seychelles Blue Pigeon. The three Mascarene islands were each home to a species: the Mauritius Blue Pigeon, the Rodrigues Blue Pigeon, and the R&lt;U+00E9&gt;union Blue Pigeon, all of which are extinct. Compared with other pigeons, the blue pigeons are medium to large, stocky, and have longer wings and tails. All the species have distinct mobile hackles on the head and neck. The tibiotarsus is comparatively long and the tarsometatarsus short.
The blue pigeons may have colonised the Mascarenes, the Seychelles or a now submerged hotspot island by &quot;island hopping&quot;. They may have evolved into a distinct genus there before reaching Madagascar. Their closest genetic relative is the Cloven-feathered Dove of New Caledonia, Drepanoptila holosericea, from which they separated 8&lt;U+2013&gt;9 million years ago. Their ancestral group appears to be the fruit doves, Ptilinopus, of Southeast Asia and Oceania.
Description
 The feathers on the head, neck and breast of the Mauritius Blue Pigeon were silvery white, long, stiffened and pointed, especially around the neck. A patch of bright red, naked skin surrounded the eyes, and extended across the cheeks to the beak, which was greenish with a dark tip. The plumage of the body was indigo, and the back, scapular feathers and wings were metallic blue. The base of the outer rectrices was partially blackish blue. The tail feathers and tail coverts were maroon. The legs were dark slate-grey. The iris was reddish orange and had an inner yellow ring. The bird was 30 cms (12 in) in length, the wings were 208 mm (8.2 in), the tail was 132 mm (5.2 in), the culmen was 25 mm (1 in), and the tarsals were 28 mm (1.10 in). It was the largest and most robust member of its genus, and the hackles were longer and covered a larger area than in other blue pigeons.
Unlike the three surviving skins of Mauritius Blue Pigeons, one of two illustrations (the other is in black-and-white) of a live individual kept in the Netherlands around 1790 shows a red forehead. Both sexes of the Seychelles Blue Pigeon also have red foreheads, and Julian Hume has suggested that the image depicts a male, which was described as &quot;infinitely more handsome&quot; than the female by Cossigny in the mid-1700s. Hume therefore interprets the three surviving skins as belonging to female specimens. A Mauritian woman recalling observations of Mauritius Blue Pigeons around 1815 mentioned green as one of its colours. Juvenile Seychelles and Comoro Blue Pigeons have green feathers, so this may also have been the case for juvenile Mauritian Pigeons.
Some depictions and descriptions have shown the legs of Mauritius Blue Pigeons as red, like those of the Madagascar Blue Pigeon. The legs of the Paris specimen were painted red when the original colour faded, presumably on the basis of such accounts. The legs of the two other surviving specimens have not been painted and have faded to a yellowish brown. The bird has also recently been depicted with facial crenulations, like those of the Seychelles Blue Pigeon. Neither feature is mentioned in contemporary accounts, and such depictions are thought to be erroneous.
Behaviour and ecology
 Few descriptions of the behaviour of Mauritius Blue Pigeons are known; unpublished notes by Desjardins are now lost. An individual was brought to the Netherlands around 1790, where it survived in the menagerie of William V, Prince of Orange for three months before dying of oedema. The only two known life drawings of the species (by G. Haasbroek) depict this individual. The illustrations show a displaying male raising its hackles into a ruff. This is a characteristic behaviour of other blue pigeons, too, and they can also vibrate their hackles. The following description of the display behaviour and calls of this individual was written on the back on the coloured drawing by Arnout Vosmaer, director of the menagerie:
 The Mauritius Blue Pigeon probably lived in pairs or small groups in humid, mountainous evergreen forests, like their extant relatives. Subfossil remains have been found in mid-west, mid-east and south-east Mauritius, indicating that the bird was once widespread. By 1812, Jacques G&lt;U+00E9&gt;rard Milbert stated that solitary individuals were found in river valleys. They probably became rarer during French rule in Mauritius (1715&lt;U+2013&gt;1810), as lowland areas of the island were almost completely deforested during this time.
Many other endemic species of Mauritius became extinct after the arrival of man, so the ecosystem of the island is severely damaged and hard to reconstruct. Before humans arrived, forests covered Mauritius entirely, but very little remains today because of deforestation. The surviving endemic fauna is still seriously threatened. The Mauritius Blue Pigeon lived alongside other recently extinct Mauritian birds such as the Dodo, the Red Rail, Thirioux's Grey Parrot, the Broad-billed Parrot, the Mauritius Owl, the Mascarene Coot, the Mauritian Shelduck, the Mauritian Duck and the Mauritius Night Heron. Extinct Mauritian reptiles include the saddle-backed Mauritius giant tortoise, the domed Mauritius giant tortoise, the Mauritian giant skink and the Round Island burrowing boa. The small Mauritian flying fox and the snail Tropidophora carinata lived on Mauritius and R&lt;U+00E9&gt;union but became extinct in both islands. Some plants, such as Casearia tinifolia and the palm orchid, have also become extinct.
Diet
 Fruits and nuts were probably the mainstay of the Mauritius Blue Pigeon's diet, and like other blue pigeons, it may have occupied the upper canopy, and migrated seasonally to where food was available. Cossigny dissected a specimen in the mid-1700s and later sent it and its stomach contents to Ren&lt;U+00E9&gt; Antoine Ferchault de R&lt;U+00E9&gt;aumur with a letter describing his findings. The gizzard and crop contained four &quot;nuts&quot;, which Cossigny was told were the seeds of either Calophyllum tacamahaca or Labourdonnaisia calophylloides. The Comoro and Seychelles Blue Pigeons also feed on C. tacamahaca, and the strong gizzard of the former helps in the digestion of the seeds.
In 1812 Jacques G&lt;U+00E9&gt;rard Milbert provided the only description of the behaviour of the bird in the wild:
The claim that the bird fed on river molluscs has been criticised by James Greenway, as blue pigeons are principally arboreal, but other mainly frugivorous pigeons, such as species of Ptilinopus and Gallicolumba, do occasionally eat molluscs and other invertebrates. The two species of Nesoenas have also been reported as eating freshwater snails, and one was seen hunting tadpoles. Milbert may in any case have been referring to arboreal snails, as extant blue pigeons rarely land on the ground. A diet of snails would have provided the birds with calcium for egg production.
Extinction
The Mauritius Blue Pigeon coexisted with humans for 200 years. Its decline can be correlated with deforestation, which is also the main threat to extant blue pigeons. Little lowland forest was left on the island by 1859. Frugivorous birds often need a large area for foraging and move between forest types to feed on different types of food, which grow irregularly. Other blue pigeons perch on bare branches, making them vulnerable to hunters. Cossigny noted that the bird had already become rare by the 1730s and attributed the decline to deforestation and hunting by escaped slaves. Unlike the Pink Pigeon, which still survives on Mauritius today, the Mauritius Blue Pigeon was not seasonally poisonous (though it was reputed to be) or unpalatable, and it was hunted for food.  The last confirmed specimen was shot in the Savanne district in 1826, and the 1832 report by Desjardins suggests that some could still be found in remote forests in the centre of the island. Edward Newton (convinced that the Pigeon still survived) interviewed two inhabitants of Mauritius about the Mauritius Blue Pigeon in 1863, and these accounts suggest that the bird survived until at least 1837. The first interviewee claimed he had killed two specimens when Colonel James Simpson stayed on the island, which was 1826&lt;U+2013&gt;37. The second was a woman who had last seen a bird around this time, and recalled hunts of it in approximately 1815, in a swampy area near Black River Gorges, south western Mauritius:  
It can be concluded that the Mauritius Blue Pigeon became extinct in the 1830s. Apart from habitat destruction and hunting, introduced predators, mainly crab-eating macaques, were probably also responsible.
References
Citations
Sources
ca:Alectroenas nitidissima de:Mauritius-Fruchttaube es:Alectroenas nitidissima eo:Ma&lt;U+016D&gt;ricia blukolombo eu:Alectroenas nitidissima fr:Founingo hollandais it:Alectroenas nitidissimus hu:Mauritiusi gy&lt;U+00FC&gt;m&lt;U+00F6&gt;lcsgalamb ja:&lt;U+30E2&gt;&lt;U+30FC&gt;&lt;U+30EA&gt;&lt;U+30B7&gt;&lt;U+30E3&gt;&lt;U+30B9&gt;&lt;U+30EB&gt;&lt;U+30EA&gt;&lt;U+30D0&gt;&lt;U+30C8&gt; pt:Alectroenas nitidissima fi:Mauritiuksensinikyyhky sv:Mauritiusbl&lt;U+00E5&gt;duva zh:&lt;U+6BDB&gt;&lt;U+91CC&gt;&lt;U+88D8&gt;&lt;U+65AF&gt;&lt;U+85CD&gt;&lt;U+9CE9&gt;
Category:Extinct birds of Indian Ocean islands Category:Alectroenas Category:Bird extinctions since 1500 Category:Birds of Mauritius Category:Animals described in 1786
