Nursing ethics is a branch of applied ethics that concerns itself with activities in the field of nursing. Nursing ethics shares many principles with medical ethics, such as beneficence, non-maleficence and respect for autonomy. It can be distinguished by its emphasis on relationships, maintaining dignity and collaborative care.
Development of subject
The nature of nursing means that nursing ethics tends to examine the ethics of caring rather than 'curing' by exploring the relationship between the nurse and the person in care.1 Early attempts to define ethics in nursing focused more on the virtues that would make a good nurse, rather than looking at what conduct is necessary to respect the human rights of the person in the nurse's care. However, in the modern era, the ethics of nursing has shifted more towards the nurse's obligation to respect these rights and this is reflected in a number of professional codes for nurses.2 For example, the importance of respecting human rights in nursing is made explicit in the latest code from the International Council of Nurses.3
Distinctive nature
Although much of nursing ethics can often appear similar to medical ethics, there are some factors that differentiate it. The focus of nursing ethics is on developing a caring relationship4 and this produces some differences. For example, a well established principle of traditional medical ethics is beneficence. Whereas, traditional medical ethics allows this to be expressed through paternalism, this approach would not be compatible with nursing ethics.5 This is because nursing theory seeks a collaborative relationship with the person in care. Themes that emphasizes respect for the autonomy and maintaining the dignity of the patient by promoting choice and control over their environment are commonly seen. This is in contrast to paternalistic practice where the health professional chooses what is in the best interests of the person from a perspective of wishing to cure them.
The distinction can be examined from a different angle. Despite the move toward more deontological themes by some, there continues to be an interest in virtue ethics6 in nursing ethics and some support for an ethic of care.7 This is considered by its advocates to focus more on relationships than principles and therefore to reflect the caring relationship in nursing more accurately than other ethical views.
Some themes in nursing ethics
Nursing seeks to defend the dignity of those in their care.8 In terms of mainstream ethical theory, this may be interpreted as having a respect for autonomy. People are then enabled to make decisions about their own treatment. Amongst other things this grounds the practice of informed consent that should be respected by the nurse.9 Although much of the debate lies in the discussion of cases where people are unable to make choices about their own treatment due to being incapacitated or having a mental illness that affects their judgement. A way to maintain autonomy is for the person to write an advance directive, outlining how they wish to be treated in the event of them not being able to make an informed choice, thus avoiding unwarranted paternalism.
Another theme is confidentiality and this is an important principle in many nursing ethical codes. This is where information about the person is only shared with others after permission of the person, unless it is felt that the information must be shared to comply with a higher duty such as preserving life. 10.
Also related to information giving is the debate relating to truth telling in interactions with the person in care. There is a balance between people having the information required to make an autonomous decision and, on the other hand, not being unnecessarily distressed by the truth. Generally the balance is in favour of truth telling due to respect for autonomy, but sometimes people will ask not to be told, or may lack the capacity to understand the implications. 11
By observing the principles above, the nurse can act in a way that maintains the dignity of the individual in their care. Although this key outcome in nursing practice is sometimes challenged by resource, policy or environmental constraints in the practice area. 12
See also
Bioethics
Clinical governance
Health care
Medical ethics
Patient advocacy
Philosophy of healthcare
References
External links
International Centre for Nursing Ethics, University of Surrey, UK
Nurses and Human Rights from Amnesty International
Links to codes of ethics by country
Nursing Ethics journal
NursingEthics.ca (Nursing ethics resource)
ja:&lt;U+770B&gt;&lt;U+8B77&gt;&lt;U+502B&gt;&lt;U+7406&gt; 
Ethics Category:Professional ethics
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
