Elliott James Wilson (born 3 November, 1976) is a former English cricketer who played county cricket for Worcestershire. He was born in St Pancras, London.
In early July 1998, Wilson made his first-team debut for Worcestershire against Northamptonshire in a tied game in the AXA League, scoring 15 and taking one catch. Later that month he scored 61 opening the batting in another one-day match, against the touring Sri Lankans, and two days later was selected to make his first-class debut against Yorkshire. It was a chastening experience, however: he made only 25 and 3 as Worcestershire were crushed by an innings and 160 runs. Nevertheless, Wilson was retained in the side and was a first-team regular for the remainder of the season, although he made no significant scores.
1999 was a fairly successful season for Wilson: in nine first-class matches, he scored 536 runs at 35.73, including a career-best 116 against Middlesex and three further half-centuries; while in List A games he scored two fifties, including a career-best 62 (albeit in a losing cause) against Warwickshire. In 2000, he was a regular selection for his county, playing 17 first-class games, but despite two further centuries he averaged under 27 overall, while in the one-day format he had a nightmare, averaging 12.64 from 16 innings with a high score of just 38.
Wilson spent the winter playing in Australia, but was forced to return home with an spinal infection caused by an unclean needle during a routine injection. He spent a considerable amount of time in hospital and had several major operations as a result of the infection leading to a significant amount of time out of the game. 1 At the time there was optimism that he would recover and play for Worcestershire again, but in the event this did not happen.He attempted a comeback in 2003, when he played a handful of matches for Cambridgeshire, including one List A game in the G&amp;G Trophy against Yorkshire, however his back was not up to the rigours of everyday cricket
References
External links
Statistical summary from CricketArchive
Category:1976 births Category:Living people Category:People from St Pancras Category:English cricketers Category:Worcestershire cricketers Wilson, Elliott
↩
