&quot;The Unforgettable Fire&quot; is a song by rock band U2. The fourth song on their 1984 album The Unforgettable Fire, it was released as the album's second single in April 1985. The band cite an art exhibition by victims of the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki that was held at the Peace Museum in Chicago as inspiration for the song. It became the band's third Top 10 hit in the UK, reaching #6 on the UK Singles Chart and #8 on the Dutch singles chart, but it was yet to break them into the U.S.
The song, like many tracks from The Unforgettable Fire, is an atmospheric composition, with ambient use of guitar and a string arrangement by Irish jazz musician Noel Kelehan.
History
 &quot;The Unforgettable Fire&quot; was composed at a time when Bono had been reading the work of poet Paul Celan, whose line &quot;poetry is a sort of homecoming.&quot; Celan's profound spiritual doubt contrasts with U2 members' previous religious certainties, and the song's line &quot;on borderlands we run...and don't look back&quot; suggests the band is more comfortable with the contradictions between rock and his religious beliefs.1
&quot;The Unforgettable Fire&quot; was first played live at the fourth show of the Unforgettable Fire Tour on 2 September 1984 in the New Zealand city of Auckland.2 It was subsequently played at almost all Unforgettable Fire Tour shows. It was played at the majority of The Joshua Tree Tour shows and the song appeared at regularly during 1989's Lovetown Tour, during which its last performance for nearly 20 years was on 6 January 1990. The song returned to the group's concert repertoire on the opening night of the 2009 U2 360&lt;U+00B0&gt; Tour, with positive reception from fans, and remained a key ingredient of that tour's set lists.
Track listings
A shaped picture disc was issued with the IS220 release. The 12&quot; Canadian release contained a false start at the beginning of &quot;Love Comes Tumbling&quot;. &quot;A Sort of Homecoming&quot; and &quot;Love Comes Tumbling&quot; on the 12&quot; Australian release were different versions from any other release.
Chart positions
Chart (1985)
Peak
position
Dutch MegaCharts3
4
Irish Singles Chart4
1
New Zealand Singles Chart5
3
UK Singles Chart6
6
See also
List of covers of U2 songs - The Unforgettable Fire
References
es:The Unforgettable Fire (canci&lt;U+00F3&gt;n) it:The Unforgettable Fire (brano musicale) nl:The Unforgettable Fire (single) pl:The Unforgettable Fire (singel)
Category:1985 singles Category:U2 songs
* ↩
Parra, Pimm Jal de la U2 Live: A Concert Documentary, p.53, 1996, Harper Collins Publishers, ISBN 0-7322-6036-1↩
↩
 Note: U2 must be searched manually.↩
 Note: U2 must be searched manually.↩
