Pocket universes are a type of very small parallel universe sometimes found in science fiction and fantasy. They are sometimes &quot;attached&quot; to a larger parent universe, making them literally pockets of space, but this is not a necessary feature and the name generally just refers to their small size. Small size can be a relative and subjective thing, however; some pocket universes are large enough to contain entire solar systems.
Notable pocket universes include:
Guybrush Threepwood, in the Monkey Island series of computer games, has a very deep pocket where he stores about everything in, ranging from unlimited grog to pianos.
The Room of Requirement at Hogwarts School of Witchcraft and Wizardry in the Harry Potter series
Bags of holding from Dungeons and Dragons (another type of literal &quot;pocket&quot; universe)
Demiplanes in the D&amp;D cosmology
The interior of a TARDIS, from Doctor Who
The Tesseracted Volume of Dr. Reed Richards, of the Fantastic Four
The Land of the Lost
Hammerspace, a humorous concept used by fans to explain where cartoon characters are able to pull items from &quot;out of nowhere.&quot;
The marbles from Men in Black.
The Pocket Universe in post-Crisis Superman comics, designed by the Time Trapper as somewhere Superboy could come from.
Parasite universes attached to the Discworld universe
The place that the extra mass comes from/goes that Transformers gain/lose when they transform
The Flat-Space dimensional compression technology in Kurt Wimmer's UltraViolet.
The night club Pocket D, found in City of Heroes and City of Villains.
Dark Aether in Metroid Prime 2: Echoes is a dark version of the planet Aether, located in an alternate dimension.
The Dunwich Room from the movie Cast a Deadly Spell.
In the 853rd century DC Universe, as seen in DC One Million, every city in the Solar System is built into its own pocket universe, leaving the planetary surfaces almost untouched.
Grandfather's pocket universe in the role-playing game Traveller.
The Other Zone in LEXX, an &quot;unstable partial universe&quot; that consists of a shifting metaphorical landscape.
Photon Nanotrance technology found in Phantasy Star Universe
Omnyou Mystics from the anime series Magical Shopping Arcade Abenobashi main responsibility was to create an alternative universe for people when something tragic had happened to them. Though not directly explained as a Pocket Universe, it is presumed that the universe is limited to the imagination and knowledge of the Omnyou Mystic who created it.
Link Books and bubbles from the Myst franchise. The Di'ni used books to for many things, refuge, prison, industry, ex.
Universe Marbles, created by artist Gateson Recko, take the men in black pocket universe and make it a reality.
World of Tiers, a series of six books by Phillip Jose Farmer in which humanoids have created a series of small pocket universes which are linked by gates, and populated by persons kidnapped in the far past from Earth.
Subspace, the Transformers answer to the FAQ, &quot;Where does Optimus Prime's trailor go?&quot; shares many characteristics with a pocket universe
Category:Fictional dimensions Category:Science fiction themes
