The Aztec Ruins National Monument preserves ancestral Pueblo structures in north-western New Mexico, United States, located close to the town of Aztec and northeast of Farmington, near the Animas River. Salmon Ruins and Heritage Park, with more ancestral Pueblo structures, lies a short distance to the south, just west of Bloomfield near the San Juan River. The buildings date back to the 11th to 13th centuries, and the misnomer attributing them to the Aztec civilization can be traced back to early American settlers in the mid-19th century. The actual construction was by the ancestral Puebloans, the Anasazi.
The site was declared &quot;Aztec Ruin National Monument&quot; on January 24, 1923, and with a boundary change it was renamed &quot;Ruins&quot; on July 2, 1928. As an historical property of the National Park Service the National Monument was administratively listed on the National Register of Historic Places on October 15, 1966. Aztec Ruins was added to the UNESCO list of World Heritage Sites, as part of the Chaco Culture National Historical Park, on December 8, 1987.
References
The National Parks: Index 2001&lt;U+2013&gt;2003. Washington: U.S. Department of the Interior.
External links
Aztec Ruins - Photos, Videos, and Maps
National Park Service website
American Southwest, a National Park Service Discover Our Shared Heritage Travel Itinerary
UNESCO World Heritage site
Aztec Ruins National Monument site map
Category:Pueblo great houses Category:Archaeological sites on the National Register of Historic Places in New Mexico Category:Native American history of New Mexico Category:National Park Service National Monuments in New Mexico Category:Native American archeology Category:Ruins in the United States Category:Protected areas of San Juan County, New Mexico Category:World Heritage Sites in the United States Category:Protected areas established in 1923 Category:Archaeological museums in New Mexico Category:Museums in San Juan County, New Mexico Category:Open air museums in New Mexico Category:Native American museums in New Mexico Category:Former populated places in New Mexico Category:History of San Juan County, New Mexico Category:1923 establishments in the United States
