M&lt;U+00E1&gt;laga Airport  is the main airport for the Costa del Sol of Spain. It is 8km southwest of M&lt;U+00E1&gt;laga and 5km north of Torremolinos. The airport has flight connections to over 60 countries worldwide, and 13 million 1 passengers passed through it in 2006. The airport currently operates with two terminals. A third terminal adjacent to the previous two, is currently under construction and is scheduled to open in 2008. A second runway is expected to open by 2010.
Traffic
Passenger numbers have increased consistently from levels of around 6 million in 1995 to 13,076,252 passengers2 in 2006.
The busiest routes are those within the EU, particularly to and from the United Kingdom and Ireland.
Access
Malaga airport is well-served by public transport, with Cercan&lt;U+00ED&gt;as M&lt;U+00E1&gt;laga train directly serving the airport from Malaga city centre and Fuengirola, an airport coach linking to Marbella bus station. The number 19 bus run by EMTSAM runs a service to Malaga Bus Station and the City Centre and costs 1 Euro. The bus runs from 6am - 12 midnight and departs from the arrivals section in both terminals 1 and 2.
History and Development
The first scheduled air service from Malaga began in 1919, when Didier Daurat began regular flights between Toulouse, Barcelona, Alicante, Tangiers, Casablanca and Malaga.
In 1937, training academies for the Air Force were set up in Malaga airport, and in 1946 the airport was opened to international civil passenger flights, and was classified as a customs post.
The one runway was extended in the 1960s, and a new terminal was erected in the centre of the site. During this period of development new navigational equipment was installed, including radar system at the end of the decade, in 1970.
Having been known by various names throughout its history, Malaga Airport was officially given its current title in 1965. Three years later, in 1968, the new passenger terminal was opened. In 1972 a second passenger terminal was opened to specifically cater for non-scheduled traffic. An increase in companies offering package holidays (around 30 by 1965) meant that this type of traffic was providing an increasing portion of the airport's business.
In 1991, the brand new Pablo Ruiz Picasso terminal was opened. This building was designed by architect Ricardo Bofill, and was built to be operated in combination with the pre-existing passenger terminal. The new terminal, known also as Terminal 2, hosts a large check-in/entrance hall with a Burger King on the southern side with a long row of check-in desks running left to right across the concourse. Once passengers haeve check-in they go beyond the check-in desks themselves to access the security areas instead of having to &quot;back-track&quot; on themselves meaning that the check-in concourse is less crowded, particularly important if people have luggage trollies. Once beyond the security check point - passengers can use the airports facilities. These include:
Duty-free/Tax-free shopping which is located on a mezzanine floor and accessed by a series of esculators.
Restaurant/Buffet style diner also located on the upper level.
Once each flight has been allocated a departure gate, passengers are told to proceed to a pier, either B to the left or C to the right. As a general rule domestic departures, in particular Iberia, Spanair flight depart from pier B along with mainland European flights. Pier C hosts flights depating to the UK and Ireland although some UK carriers such as easyJet flights to Liverpool occasionally depart from pier B.
Further development was done on the airport in the mid-90s, with the old passenger building being converted into a general aviation terminal, and a new hangar for large aircraft maintenance being built to the north of the airport site. Also constructed in this period was a terminal specifically catering to cargo traffic.
A new, modern control tower was opened in 2002. Further developments, including a third terminal and car park, are under construction and scheduled to open in 2008. A second runway will be finished by 2010.
Airlines and destinations
The airport has daily flights from all over Europe and the world, including scheduled flights from the following airlines:
Air Berlin (Berlin-Tegel, Cologne/Bonn, D&lt;U+00FC&gt;sseldorf, Frankfurt, Hamburg, Hanover, Paderborn, Palma de Mallorca)
Air Europa (Bilbao, Madrid, Palma de Mallorca, Paris-Charles de Gaulle)
Air Finland (Helsinki)
Air Transat (Montr&lt;U+00E9&gt;al) [seasonal, starts May 5, 2007]
Aer Lingus (Cork, Dublin)
Alitalia (Milan-Malpensa, Rome-Fiumicino)
Blue Air (Bucharest-Aurel Vlaicu)
bmibaby (Birmingham, Cardiff, East Midlands, Manchester)
British Airways
British Airways operated by GB Airways (London-Gatwick, London-Heathrow)
Centralwings (Warsaw) [Starts April 30, 2007]
Clickair (Barcelona)
Condor Airlines (Frankfurt, Munich)
easyJet (Basel/Mulhouse, Belfast, Berlin-Sch&lt;U+00F6&gt;nefeld, Bristol, Dortmund, Geneva, Glasgow, Liverpool, London-Gatwick, London-Luton, London-Stansted, Milan-Malpensa, Newcastle, Nottingham)
Finnair (Helsinki)
Flybe (Birmingham, Exeter, Norwich, Southampton)
Flyglobespan (Durham Tees Valley, Edinburgh, Glasgow)
General Aviation Service SL (M&lt;U+00E1&gt;laga, Madrid-Barajas, Barcelona y Madrid-Torrej&lt;U+00F3&gt;n) Supervisi&lt;U+00F3&gt;n, representaci&lt;U+00F3&gt;n y handling de aviaci&lt;U+00F3&gt;n ejecutiva.
Germanwings (Stuttgart)
Jet2.com (Belfast, Blackpool, Leeds/Bradford, Manchester, Newcastle)
Iberia (Barcelona, Madrid)
Iberia operated by Air Nostrum (Asturias, Bilbao, Gran Canaria, Ibiza, Melilla, Palma de Mallorca, San Sebastian, Santander, Tenerife-North, Valencia)
LagunAir (Le&lt;U+00F3&gt;n, Salamanca)
LTU International (D&lt;U+00FC&gt;sseldorf, Munich)
Lufthansa (Frankfurt)
Luxair (Luxembourg)
Monarch Airlines (Aberdeen, Birmingham, London-Gatwick, London-Luton, Manchester)
Norwegian Air Shuttle (Bergen, Oslo, Stavanger, Trondheim [starts April 14, 2007], Warsaw)
Portugalia (Lisbon)
Rossiya Airlines (St. Petersburg)
Ryanair (Charleroi, Dublin, Frankfurt-Hahn, Shannon)
Scandinavian Airlines System (Stockholm-Arlanda [starts 2007-04-28])
SAS Braathens (Oslo)
Saudi Arabian Airlines (Riyadh, Jeddah) [Seasonal]
SkyEurope (Bratislava [starts June, 2 2007], Budapest [starts June, 2 2007])
Spanair (Barcelona, Bilbao, Copenhagen, Gran Canaria, Madrid, Stockholm-Arlanda, Tenerife-South)
Sterling Airlines (Aalborg, Billund, Copenhagen, Oslo, Stockholm-Arlanda)
Swiss International Air Lines (Geneva, Z&lt;U+00FC&gt;rich)
Thomsonfly (Birmingham, Bournemouth, Bristol, Cardiff, Coventry, Doncaster, London-Gatwick, London-Luton, Manchester, Newcastle)
transavia.com (Amsterdam, Rotterdam, Eindhoven)
Vueling Airlines (Barcelona, Madrid)
Virgin Express (Brussels)
External links
Malaga Airport Official Website
GENERAL AVIATION SERVICE SL HOME PAGE
Malaga Tourism Website
The Official Website for Tourism in Spain
Andalucia Tourism Website
Photo 1 Photo 2 Photo 3 - aerial and terminal photos
Terminal 3 Design Renders (2008)
es:Aeropuerto de M&lt;U+00E1&gt;laga
Category:Airports in Andalusia Category:M&lt;U+00E1&gt;laga province
