California State University, Los Angeles (also known as Cal State L.A., CSULA, or &quot;'CSLA&quot;') is a public university, part of the California State University system. The campus is located in Los Angeles, California, United States, in the University Hills district at the center of Los Angeles metropolitan area just five miles from Los Angeles civic and cultural center. Located next to two major interstate highway systems; Interstate 10 Freeway and Interstate 710 Freeway.
Serving approximately 21,000 students primarily from the greater Los Angeles area. CSULA has more than 190,000 alumni. CSULA operates year round on the quarter system. Four quarters, each 11 weeks in duration. Cal State L.A. is organized into six colleges that incorporate 50 academic departments and divisions offering a variety of majors.1 Six colleges offer nationally recognized science, arts, business, criminal justice, engineering, nursing, education and humanities programs at Cal State LA. CSULA is home to the critically-acclaimed Luckman Jazz Orchestra and to a unique university center for gifted students as young as 10.
The 175-acre hilltop campus core is home to the nation's first Charter College of Education, a NASA-funded SPACE program, a National Science Foundation funded environmental research center and other award-winning engineering programs. U.S. News has ranked CSULA's undergraduate business program as one of the best in the Los Angeles area.
The teacher credential program has awarded more credentials in the state of California than any other public institution. Cal State L.A. also has the nation's largest early/pre-teen collegiate program, and the only graduate Criminalistics program west of the Mississippi River. The Television, Film, and Media Studies program is one of the foremost film schools in the CSU system, coordinating film and TV production experiences with the neighboring Hollywood film industry. The university awards more bachelor's degrees to Hispanics than any other California college or university.
It is also home to the Los Angeles County High School for the Arts, a prestigious arts high school, notable for being the only arts high school in Los Angeles that allows for students from any district within Los Angeles County to attend. Classrooms are shared with Cal State L.A., however, LACHSA activities tend to be separate from those of Cal State L.A's. Notable LACHSA alumni include singer Josh Groban, actress Jenna Elfman.2 actor/singer Corbin Bleu and renowned Los Angeles Clippers executive Ron &quot;Country Club&quot; Kobata.
History
 The campus is nestled among rolling hills on a site that once housed one of California's 36 original adobes, built in 1776 by Franciscan missionaries and destroyed by fire in 1908. These lands once were part of a Spanish land grant known as the Rancho Rosa Castilla, created by the family of Juan Batista Batz, a Basque rancher from northern Spain who settled here in the 1850s. The inspiration for the name of the rancho, according to local historians, was the wild rose that once grew near the ranch home.
CSULA was founded in 1947 by an act of the California legislature and opened for classes on the campus of Los Angeles City College, itself the former location of UCLA, as the Los Angeles State College of Applied Arts and Sciences. P. Victor Peterson was LACC's first president. The shared-campus experiment proved to be unwieldy and the school moved to its present location in 1955.3
In 1964 the school was renamed California State College at Los Angeles (CSCLA) when it became part of the California State College (CSC) system. In 1972, CSCLA was awarded University status and was renamed the California State University, Los Angeles (CSULA).
Campus life and cost of university
 Cal State LA has one of the lowest tuition fees, even though quarterly fees have nearly doubled since the 2001-02 academic year. Tuition and fees for in-state is $3,035 and $11,171 for out-of-state. There are different places inside the campus where they serve food and coffee. In addition the university food court owned by Pepsi-Co, offers a selection of fast food chain restaurants that include El Pollo Loco, Carl's Jr., Rice Garden and Kikka Sushi. A $30 million University-Student Union building under construction scheduled to be completed on September 2007 will offer a place for students and faculty to congregate and interact after or before class.
Student housing
First on-campus housing was opened on June 1984 and three years later second residential life complex was opened. CSULA has a student housing complex where students can rent a house at double occupancy for $413.00 per month (as of September 2006). During 1984 Summer Olympics that took place in Los Angeles CSULA student houses were upgraded and expanded because it housed the athletics of the 1984 Summer Olympics.4
University Times
 The University Times is a student-run newspaper. The first student newspaper, at that time called The College Times, was published in June 1948 for the first time. In 1965 The College Times was named the best newspaper by California Intercollegiate Press. On October 2, 1972 The College Times changed its name to University Times, in accordance with the change in university status.
In January 2007, The University Times changed its publication schedule from a twice weekly paper to a weekly paper, publishing on Tuesdays. The format change to a style similar to the alternative newspaper, LA Weekly, allowed for a greater number of pages to run and allow more in-depth coverage of news stories relevant to the student body and surrounding community.
During the Summer of 2007, the University Times underwent a transition period as the paper started a merger process with its new online presence, Cool State. The paper scaled back production to four issues at the end of the Summer quarter and began to gear up for a formal re-launching with the start of the Fall Quarter.
Parking and public transportation
 Cal State LA has ample parking spaces for its students and staff. Student permits for parking at Cal State LA cost about $84 (as of September 2007) for a one quarter parking permit.
Cal State LA is uniquely commuter friendly. There are several large parking structures, and surface lots for automobiles. In addition, the school is home to the first commuter rail station on a college campus, the Cal State L.A. station on Metrolink's San Bernardino Line, which opened in October 1994. The school is also accessible from the California State University, Los Angeles station on the El Monte Busway; both stations are located at the south end of the campus. Metro Local lines 665, 71, and 256, as well as neighborhood shuttles serve the school.
Programs
CSULA
Early Entrance Program
The Early Entrance Program (EEP) is designed to allow students between the ages of 11 and 16 to enter college at a significantly early age. Each year, 30 students are chosen for this opportunity. Criteria include grades, test performance, a maturity evaluation, and successful completion of two Cal State L.A. courses. Once admitted, 'EEPsters' take both regular and honors classes, and follow a normal course of college-level study. Altogether, the program's participants number about 150. Some of the programs that provides to students and community include an NEH and Rockefeller-supported humanities center, NASA-funded center for space research.
Forensic Sciences
The school has had a growing forensic science program, which has been a part of the school curriculum since the founding of the school. The university&lt;U+2019&gt;s Department of Criminal Justice and Criminalistics is in the process of relocating from its current location in King Hall to the new Los Angeles Regional Crime Lab. The new Hertzberg-Davis Forensic Science Center, which was dedicated on May 11, 2007, will jointly house, besides the department, the LAPD&lt;U+2019&gt;s Scientific Investigation Division, the L.A. County Sheriff&lt;U+2019&gt;s Department Scientific Services Bureau and the California Forensic Science Institute at Cal State L.A.
Future developments
 The University has several construction projects slated for the next five years. Construction on wing An of the new science complex, which was constructed on the site of the university's former tennis and basketball courts, is expected to be completed by Fall of 2007. In addition, construction on Wing B has begun as of the Spring of 2007. The maintenance yard at the south entrance of the campus will be redesigned to replace the exiting shacks with one building.
Another building has been proposed at the north end of campus, in front of parking lot F. The new building will house additional classrooms for the Los Angeles High School for Performing Arts. Construction on that building is set to begin sometime in 2009. Another building scheduled for construction is the Steve and Eva Stern Charter School, which will be located in the southern end of Parking Lot 2. There is no scheduled construction timeline set for the charter school.
The &quot;Solar Eagle&quot; and &quot;Super Eagle&quot;
The College of Engineering, Computer Science, and Technology has achieved international recognition with its advanced vehicles. The Solar Eagle III has competed in solar car races in the United States and Australia, winning a national championship at the American Solar Challenge in 1997.
The ultra-high gas mileage car ECST Super Eagle won the American Society of Automotive Engineers' 2004 mileage competition with a tested fuel consumption of 1,615 miles per gallon. The faculty team advisor, James Ettaro, was honored by the SAE. The Solar Eagle and Super Eagle are the latest in a long line of solar-powered cars and other super-efficient vehicle technologies.
Greek life
Excluding the Greek Council and Order of Omega, as of Fall 2005, the CSULA Campus is home to fifteen &lt;U+201C&gt;social&lt;U+201D&gt; fraternal organizations, seven fraternities and seven sororities. Within that population there are three IFC fraternities, two NPHC fraternities, two statewide Latino fraternities, one Armenian fraternity, two NPC sororities, two NALFO sororities, two (2) local sororities, and one statewide Asian sorority. The representative governing body of the Greek system is the CSULA Greek Council. It is advised and regulated by the university through the Center for Student Development and Programs, a division of CSULA&lt;U+2019&gt;s University-Student Union. This division is under the auspices of both the University-Student Union and the Department of Student of Affairs. Cal State L.A.&lt;U+2019&gt;s Greek System began with the establishment of the Alpha Theta Pi Sorority on November 15, 1948. It has grown into a vast social network of collegiate men and women composed of chapters that are local, statewide, national, and international.
 Sigma Nu, Phi Sigma Kappa, and Sigma Alpha Epsilon are the nationally and internationally based social fraternities of the Cal State L.A. Greek System, otherwise known as the IFC Fraternities. The parent organizations of Sigma Nu, Phi Sigma Kappa, and Sigma Alpha Epsilon are members of the North-American Interfraternity Conference. Delta Zeta and Alpha Sigma Tau are the sorority equivalencies of the IFC fraternities, otherwise known as NPC Sororities. Their parent organizations are members of the National Panhellenic Conference, a governing body for 26 women's national and international sororities.
Cal State L.A. is host to four Latino Greek-lettered organizations: Lambda Theta Nu, Lambda Theta Alpha and the academic chapter of the year; Gamma Zeta Alpha who are all NALFO organizations or those whose parent organizations are members of the National Association of Latino Fraternal Organizations. Additionally, Cal State L.A. is also home to Beta Gamma Nu a local fraternity &amp; Sigma Lambda Beta. Recently with the continuing growth of Latino organizations on campus, CSULA has become the home forDelta Sigma Chi co-ed Fraternity Inc. The first and only Latino Co-Ed social fraternity at California State University,Los Angeles.
Alpha Phi Alpha and Phi Beta Sigma are the Black Greek-letter fraternities on the CSULA campus, also known as NPHC fraternities. Their parent organizations are members of the National Pan-Hellenic Council. It promotes interaction through forums, meetings and other mediums for the exchange of information and engages in cooperative programming and initiatives through various activities and functions.
Additionally, Cal State L.A. is home to one statewide Asian Greek-letter sorority, Kappa Zeta Phi, and one statewide Armenian Greek-letter fraternity, Alpha Epsilon Omega and Asian fraternity and sorority from Philippines Kappa Rho Kappa.
Athletics
CSULA Men's Basketball
The Golden Eagles are member of the California Collegiate Athletic Association and compete on the Division II level of the NCAA. The university fields eleven intercollegiate teams for men or women in Baseball, Basketball, Cross Country, Soccer, Tennis, Volleyball, Indoor Track, and outdoor Track and Field.56
Women's Sports
Men's Sports
Basketball
Baseball
Soccer
Basketball
Tennis
Soccer
Volleyball
Track and Field (outdoor)
Cross-Country
Track and Field (Indoor)
Track and Field (outdoor)
Associated Students, Incorporated
President: Joaquin Nabarrete
V.P. of Administration: El Batmanual
V.P. of Academic Governance: Richard Navarrette
V.P. of Finance: Claudine Aguilar
Secretary/Treasurer: Jennifer Chemel
Executive Director: Intef W. Weser
Assistant Director: Rainee Redmond
Programs Coordinator: Jarrett Fisher
Administrative Assistant: Nassrin Bonyadloo
Service Center Manager: Michelle Lobo
Service Center Advisor: Keesha Hernandez, Max Gu, Magali Panduro, Matt Chung
Notable alumni
Samuel Durrance - NASA astronaut (Columbia and Endeavour), astrophysicist and educator
Sy Liebergot - NASA flight controller during Project Apollo, Author and Space Historian.
James A. Bell - current CFO and former interim CEO/President of the Boeing Company &amp; the first black American to lead a major aerospace company
Earl G. Yarbrough - current president of Savannah State University
Lee Baca - Sheriff of Los Angeles County
Jaime Escalante - mathematician and teacher
Octavia Butler - author, science fiction
Joseph Wambaugh - novelist and bestselling author
Entertainment
Isaac Larian - Chief Executive Officer of MGA Entertainment
Elizabeth M. Devine - Co-executive Producer, CSI: Miami
Edward James Olmos - actor, filmmaker
Robin Shou - martial artist and actor
Kara Brock - television and film actress.
Scott Shaw - author. actor, filmmaker, and martial artist
Billy Barty - actor, activist for Little People rights
Dustin Lee Abraham - producer and screenwriter
Political alumni
Rosario Marin - 41st U.S. Treasurer
Stephen Cooley- District Attorney, Los Angeles County
Lucille Roybal-Allard - Member of United States House of Representatives
Diane Watson - Member of the United States House of Representatives and formerly of the California State Senate
Mervyn Dymally- 1st foreign born black Member of Congress, first black Lt. Governor of California, former California State Senator and current Member of the California State Assembly
Michael D. Antonovich - politician, member of the Los Angeles County Board of Supervisors (Fifth District)
Julian C. Dixon- Member California State Assembly, Member of Congress
Juanita Millender-McDonald - Member of United States House of Representatives
Robert A. Underwood - Delegate of Guam to the United States House of Representatives
Maxine Waters - Member of United States House of Representatives
Sports alumni
Billie Jean King - professional tennis player
Mike Burns - professional Major League Baseball pitcher for the Boston Red Sox
Jay Gibbons - professional Major League Baseball player with the Baltimore Orioles
Walter Johnson - former National Football League player with the Cleveland Browns
Martin Vasquez - professional former Major League Soccer and Mexican First Division player
Mal Whitfield - gold medalist 1948 London Olympics and 1952 Helsinki Olympics
Frank Zane - professional body builder &amp; teacher
Past Notable Professor
Hal Fishman - KTLA longest-running news anchor in the history of American television.
Gallery
&lt;U+200E&gt;
Image:CSULA_Welcome_Board.jpg|CSULA Welcome Board Image:CSULA_WELCOME_CENTER.jpg|CSULA Welcome Center
External links
CSULA official website
CSULA luckman fine arts complex website
CSULA athletics official website
See also
California State University (CSU) official website
CSU mentor (apply online for CSU universities)
FAFSA official website
California Cal Grant official website
SAT test registration
References
de:California State University, Los Angeles fr:Universit&lt;U+00E9&gt; d'&lt;U+00C9&gt;tat de Californie &lt;U+00E0&gt; Los Angeles
Category:Educational institutions established in 1947 Category:California State University, Los Angeles Category:Western Association of Schools and Colleges Category:Multi-sport clubs
http://www.calstatela.edu/academic/aa/dcc/indexcollege.htm↩
http://www.lachsa.org↩
http://www.lacitycollege.edu/public/75thAnniversary/75th_pages/history.htm↩
http://www.calstatela.edu/univ/housing/index.htm↩
http://www.csulaathletics.com↩
http://www.csulaathletics.com/News/gen/2007/6/13/6-13%20Directors%20Cup.asp?path=gen↩
