The accident aircraft, ZK-NZP seen at London Heathrow Airport in 1977
Air New Zealand Flight 901 (TE901) was a scheduled Air New Zealand Antarctic sightseeing flight that operated between 1977 and 1979, from Auckland Airport to Antarctica and return. On 28 November 1979, the fourteenth such flight, operated by a McDonnell Douglas DC-10-30, crashed into Mount Erebus on Ross Island, killing all 237 passengers and 20 crew on board. The accident is commonly known as the (Mount) Erebus disaster.
Background
The flight was designed and marketed as a unique sightseeing experience, carrying an experienced Antarctic guide who pointed out scenic features and landmarks using the aircraft public-address system, while passengers enjoyed a low-flying sweep of McMurdo Sound.1
The flights left and returned to New Zealand the same day. The flight left Auckland International Airport at 8:00am, and completed a  trip to Antarctica and back, arriving at Christchurch International Airport at 7:00pm. The aircraft would make a 45-minute stop at Christchurch for refuelling, before flying the remaining  to Auckland, arriving at 9:00pm. Tickets for the November 1979 flights cost NZ$359 per person (equal to around $1218 in September 2009).23
Dignitaries such as Sir Edmund Hillary had acted as guides on previous flights. Sir Edmund was scheduled to act as the guide for the fatal flight, but had to cancel due to other commitments. His long-time friend and climbing companion, Peter Mulgrew, stood in as guide.4
The flights usually operated at about 85% of capacity; the empty seats, usually the centre ones, allowed passengers to move more easily about the cabin to look out of the windows.
The aircraft used on the Antarctic flights were Air New Zealand's eight McDonnell Douglas DC-10-30 trijets. The aircraft on 28 November was registered ZK-NZP. The 182nd DC-10 to be built, and the fourth DC-10 to be introduced by Air New Zealand, ZK-NZP was handed over to the airline on 12 December 1974 at McDonnell Douglas's Long Beach plant. It was the first Air New Zealand DC-10 to be fitted with General Electric CF6-50C engines as built, and had logged 20,750 flight hours prior to the crash.56
Accident
Unless otherwise stated, all times are New Zealand Standard Time (UTC+12)
Circumstances surrounding the accident
Captain Jim Collins and co-pilot Greg Cassin had never flown to Antarctica before, but they were experienced pilots and the flight was considered a simple one. On 9 November 1979, 19 days before departure, the two pilots had attended a briefing in which they were given a copy of the previous flight's flight plan.7
However, unbeknown to Captain Collins, at the time of the briefing, the flight plan coordinates transcribed into Air New Zealand's ground computer differed from the route flight plan approved in 1977 by the New Zealand Department of Transport Civil Aviation Division. The approved flight plan was along a track directly from Cape Hallett to the McMurdo Non-Directional Beacon (NDB), which, coincidentally, entailed flying almost directly over the 12,448 ft peak of Mt Erebus. However, the print out from Air New Zealand's ground computer system presented at the November 9 briefing corresponded to a southerly flight path down the middle of the wide McMurdo Sound, leaving Mt Erebus approximately 27 miles to the east. The majority of previous flights had also entered this flight plan's coordinates into their aircraft INS navigational systems and flown the McMurdo Sound route, unaware that the route flown did not correspond with the approved route.8
Eventually, the Captain of a previous flight on November 14 compared the coordinates of the McMurdo TACAN navigation beacon (approximately three miles east of McMurdo NDB), and the McMurdo waypoint that the flight crew had entered into the INS, and was surprised to find a large distance between the two. After this flight, this Captain advised Air New Zealand's Navigation section of the difference in positions. For reasons that were disputed, this triggered Air New Zealand's Navigation section to subsequently resolve to update the McMurdo waypoint coordinates stored in the ground computer to correspond with the coordinates of the McMurdo TACAN beacon, despite this also not corresponding with the approved route.
The Navigation section changed the McMurdo waypoint coordinate stored in the ground computer system at approximately 1:40 am on the morning of the flight. Crucially, however, the flight crew of Flight 901 was not notified of the change. The flight plan print-out given to the crew on the morning of the flight, which was subsequently hand entered by the flight crew into the aircraft's INS, differed from the flight plan presented at the November 9 briefing and to Captain Collins' map mark-ups he had prepared the night previously. The key difference between the routes was that the flight plan presented at the November 9 briefing corresponded to a track down McMurdo Sound, giving Mt Erebus a wide berth to the east, whereas the flight plan printed on the morning of the flight corresponded to a track that coincided with Mt Erebus. In contrast to the McMurdo Sound route, the updated route would result in a collision with Mt Erebus if this leg was flown at an altitude of less than 13,000 feet.9
The flight had earlier paused during the approach to McMurdo Sound to carry out a descent, via a figure-eight manoeuvre, through a gap in the low cloud base (later estimated to be at approximately 2,000&lt;U+2013&gt;3,000 feet) whilst over water in order to establish visible contact with surface landmarks, and afford the passengers a better view.10 It was established that either the flight crew was unaware, or ignored, the approved route's Minimum Safe Altitude (MSA) of 16,000 ft for the approach to Mt Erebus, and 6,000 ft in the sector south of Mt Erebus (and then only when the cloud base was at 7,000 ft or better). However, photos and news stories from previous flights showed that many of these had also been flown at levels substantially below the route's MSA. In addition, pre-flight briefings for previous flights had authorised descents to any altitude authorised by the US Air Traffic Controller at McMurdo Station. As the US ATC expected Flight 901 to follow the same route as previous flights down McMurdo Sound, and in accordance with the route waypoints previously advised by Air New Zealand to them, the ATC advised Flight 901 that it was authorised to descend to 1,500 ft.
Cockpit Voice Recorder (CVR) transcripts from the last minutes of the flight prior to impact with Mt Erebus indicated that the flight crew believed they were flying over McMurdo Sound, well to the west of Mt Erebus and with the Ross Ice Shelf visible on the horizon, when in reality they were flying directly towards the mountain. Despite most of the crew being engaged in identifying visual landmarks at the time, they never perceived the mountain directly in front of them. Approximately six minutes after completing a descent in Visual Meteorological Conditions, in good weather and with visibility out to at least 23 miles, Flight 901 collided with Mt Erebus at an altitude of approximately 1,500 ft.11
Changes to the coordinates and departure
Collins and Cassin input the coordinates into the plane's computer before they departed at 8.21 am NZDT (UTC+13) from Auckland International Airport (now Auckland Airport). Unknown to them, the coordinates had been modified earlier that morning to correct the error introduced years previously and undetected until now. These new coordinates changed the flight plan to fly  east of where the pilots intended the plane to fly. The coordinates instructed the plane to fly over Lewis Bay and directly over Mount Erebus, a  high volcano, instead of over McMurdo Sound.12
About four hours after a smooth take-off the flight was  away from McMurdo Station. The radio communications centre there allowed the pilots to descend to  and to continue &quot;visually.&quot; Air safety regulations at the time did not allow flights to descend to lower than , even in good weather, although Air New Zealand's own travel magazine showed photographs of previous flights clearly operating below . Collins believed the plane was over open water.13
Collision with Mount Erebus
 Collins told McMurdo Station that he would be dropping to 2,000 ft (610 m), at which point he switched control of the aircraft to the automated computer system. At the time there was a layer of cloud that blended with the white of the volcano, forming a sector whiteout&lt;U+2013&gt;there was no contrast between the two to warn the pilots. The effect was to fool all on the flight deck into thinking that the white mountainside was the Ross Ice Shelf, a huge expanse of floating ice derived from the great ice sheets of Antarctica, which was in fact now behind the mountain. As it was little understood, even by experienced polar pilots, Air New Zealand had provided no training for the flight crew on the sector whiteout phenomenon. Consequently, the crew thought they were flying along McMurdo Sound, when in actual fact they were flying over Lewis Bay in front of Mt. Erebus.14
At 12.49 p.m., the Ground Proximity Warning System began sounding a warning that the plane was dangerously close to terrain. Although Collins immediately requested go-around power,15 there was no time to divert the aircraft and six seconds later the plane collided with the side of Mount Erebus and disintegrated, instantly killing all on board. The pilot did not pull vigorously on the control column as a reflex to seeing imminent death, instead he raised the nose of the aircraft 15 degrees as rehearsed in training&lt;U+2013&gt;it would then seem likely they never recognised their perfect white view as a mountain. Most of the aircraft was smashed into small pieces, with the exception of the empennage.
McMurdo Station attempted to contact the flight after the crash, and informed Air New Zealand headquarters in Auckland that communication with the aircraft had been lost. United States search and rescue personnel were placed on standby.16
Nationalities of passengers and crew
1718 The nationalities of the passengers and crew included:
Country
Passengers
Crew
180
20
24
22
6
2
1
1
1
Total
237
20
Rescue and recovery
Initial search and discovery
At 2:00pm the United States Navy released a situation report, stating:
Air New Zealand Flight 901 has failed to acknowledge radio transmissions. ... One LC-130 fixed wing aircraft and two UH-1N rotary wing aircraft are preparing to launch for SAR effort.19
Data gathered at 3:43 pm was added to the situation report, stating that the visibility was . It also stated that six aircraft had been launched to find the flight.20
Flight 901 was supposed to arrive back at Christchurch at 7:05 pm NZDT, for a stopover including refuelling and a crew change before completing the journey back to Auckland. Around 50 passengers were also supposed to disembark at Christchurch. Initially airport staff told the waiting families that it was usual for the flight to be slightly late, but as time went on, it became clear that something was wrong.21
At 10:00 pm NZDT, about half an hour after the plane would have run out of fuel, Air New Zealand informed the press that it believed the aircraft to be lost. Rescue teams searched along the assumed flight path, but found nothing. At 12:55 am, the crew of a United States Navy aircraft discovered unidentified debris along the side of Mount Erebus.22 No survivors could be seen. At around 9:00 am, twenty hours after the crash, helicopters with search parties managed to land on the side of the mountain. It was confirmed that the wreckage was that of Flight 901 and that all 237 passengers and 20 crewmembers had been killed. The DC-10's altitude at the time of the collision was 1,465 ft (445 m).
The vertical stabilizer section of the plane, with the koru logo intact, was seen in the snow.23 Bodies and fragments of the aircraft were flown back to Auckland for identification.24 The remains of 44 of the victims were not individually identified, and the funeral for them was held on 22 February 1980.
Recovery effort - Operation Overdue
The recovery effort of Flight 901 was called &quot;Operation Overdue&quot;.
Efforts for recovery were extensive, owing in part to the pressure from Japan, as 24 passengers had been Japanese. The operation lasted until 9 December 1979, with up to 60 recovery workers on site at a time. A team of New Zealand Police officers and a Mountain Face Rescue team were dispatched on a No 40 Squadron C-130 Hercules aircraft.
The job of individual identification took many weeks, and was largely done by teams of pathologists, dentists and police. The mortuary team was led by Inspector Jim Morgan, who collated and edited a report on the recovery operation. Record keeping had to be meticulous because of the number and fragmented state of the human remains that had to be identified to the satisfaction of the coroner. From a purely technical point of view the exercise was both innovative and highly successful, with 83% of the deceased eventually being identified, sometimes from evidence such as a finger capable of yielding a print, or keys in a pocket.
The last searchers off the mountain were Sergeant Mark Penn and Constable Al Windleburn and several DSIR personnel, after a final 36 hours non-stop shift.
In 1979 the post traumatic stress suffered by the body recovery and identification teams was recognised, some of whom broke down under their grim duty. Counselling was offered to all who wished it, and the debriefing report specifically noted the need for officers in command of such operations to know how to recognise and deal with the signs of stress in staff. It took several years more for psychological support to become standard practice in the New Zealand Police.
There was no official group recognition for the efforts of the police involved on this occasion, but Inspector R. S. Mitchell, leader of the body recovery team, and Inspector Morgan, leader of the DVI team, were awarded the OBE for their services in relation to this disaster.
In 2006 the New Zealand Special Service Medal (Erebus) was instituted to recognise the service of New Zealanders, and citizens of the United States of America and other countries, who were involved in the body recovery, identification and crash investigation phases of Operation Overdue. On June 5, 2009, the New Zealand government recognized some of the Americans who assisted in Operation Overdue during a ceremony in Washington, D.C. A total of 40 Americans, mostly Navy personnel, are eligible to receive the medal.25
Accident inquiries
Page four of the situation report about flight TE901 released by the United States Navy at 12.55 a.m., with the text: &quot;Debris at crash site being blown by the wind. No apparent survivors.&quot;
Despite Flight 901 crashing in one of the most isolated parts of the world, evidence from crash site was extensive. Both the cockpit voice recorder and the flight data recorder were still in working order and able to be deciphered. Extensive photographic footage from the moments before the crash was available - being a sightseeing flight, most passengers were carrying cameras, of which the majority of the film was able to be developed.2627
Official accident report
The accident report compiled by New Zealand's chief inspector of air accidents, Ron Chippindale, was released on 12 June 1980. It cited pilot error as the principal cause of the accident and attributed blame to the decision of Collins to descend below the customary minimum altitude level, and continue at that height when the crew was unsure of the plane's position. The customary minimum altitude prohibited descent below 6,000 ft (1,830 m) even under good weather conditions, but a combination of factors led the captain to believe the plane was over the sea (the middle of McMurdo Sound and few small low islands), and previous flight 901 pilots had regularly flown low over the area to give passengers a better view, as evidenced by photographs in Air New Zealand's own travel magazine and by first-hand accounts of personnel based on the ground at NZ's Scott Base.
Mahon Inquiry
In response to public demand, the New Zealand Government announced a further one-man Royal Commission of Inquiry into the accident, to be performed by the highly respected judge Justice Peter Mahon.
Mahon's report, released on 27 April 1981, cleared the crew of blame for the disaster. Mahon said the single, dominant and effective cause of the crash was Air New Zealand's alteration of the flight plan waypoint coordinates in the ground navigation computer without advising the crew. The new flight plan took the aircraft directly over the mountain, rather than along its flank. Due to whiteout conditions, &quot;a malevolent trick of the polar light&quot;, the crew were unable to visually identify the mountain in front of them. Furthermore, they may have experienced a rare meteorological phenomenon called sector whiteout which creates the visual illusion of a flat horizon far in the distance (it appeared to be a very broad gap between cloud layers allowing a view of the distant Ross Ice Shelf and beyond). Mahon noted that the flight crew, with many thousands of hours of flight time between them, had considerable experience with the extreme accuracy of the aircraft's inertial navigation system. Mahon also found that the radio communications centre at McMurdo Station had authorised Collins to descend to 1,500 ft (450 m), below the minimum safe level.
In para. 377 of his report, Mahon controversially claimed airline executives and senior (management) pilots engaged in a conspiracy to whitewash the inquiry, famously accusing them of &quot;an orchestrated litany of lies&quot; by covering up evidence and lying to investigators. Mahon found that in the original report Chippindale had a poor grasp of the flying involved in jet airline operation, as he (and the New Zealand CAA in general) was typically involved in investigating simple light aircraft crashes. Chippindale's investigation techniques were revealed as lacking in rigour, allowing for errors and avoidable gaps in knowledge to occur in reports. Consequently Chippindale entirely missed the importance of the flight plan change and the rare meteorological conditions of Antarctica. Had the pilots been informed of the flight plan change, the crash would have been avoided.
Appeals
Air New Zealand appealed against Mahon's findings to the Court of Appeal, which set aside the costs order against the airline. Mahon in turn appealed to the Privy Council in London. His findings as to the cause of the accident, namely reprogramming of the aircraft's flight plan by the ground crew who then failed to inform the flight crew, had not been challenged before the Court of Appeal, and so were not challenged before the Privy Council. His conclusion that the crash was the result of the aircrew being misdirected as to their flight path, not due to pilot error, therefore remained. But the Board held that Mahon had acted in excess of his jurisdiction and in breach of natural justice by going on to make findings of a conspiracy by Air New Zealand to cover up the errors of the ground staff. In their judgement, delivered on 20 October 1982, the Law Lords dismissed Mahon's appeal and upheld the decision of the Court of Appeal. Aviation researcher John King wrote in his book New Zealand Tragedies, Aviation:
''They demolished his case (Mahon's case for a cover-up) item by item, including Exhibit 164 which they said could not &quot;be understood by any experienced pilot to be intended for the purposes of navigation&quot; and went even further, saying there was no clear proof on which to base a finding that a plan of deception, led by the company's chief executive, had ever existed.''
&quot;Exhibit 164&quot; was a photocopied diagram of McMurdo Sound showing a southbound flight path passing west of Ross Island and a northbound path passing the island on the east. The diagram did not extend sufficiently far south to show where, how, or even if they joined, and left the two paths disconnected. Evidence had been given to the effect that the diagram had been included in the flight crew's briefing documentation.
Justice Mahon's report was finally tabled in Parliament by the then Minister of Transport, Maurice Williamson, in 1999.
Legacy of the disaster
Most of the wreckage of Flight 901 remains on the slopes of Mount Erebus. This photo, taken on the 25th anniversary in 2004, shows part of the DC-10's fuselage.
The crash of Flight 901 is one of New Zealand's two deadliest disasters - the other being the 1931 Hawke's Bay earthquake, which killed 256 people. At the time of the disaster, it was the fourth-deadliest air crash of all time, and  ranks sixteenth.
Flight 901, in conjunction with the crash of American Airlines Flight 191 earlier that year, severely hurt the reputation of the McDonnell Douglas DC-10. ZK-NZP, along with the other seven Air New Zealand DC-10's, had only just returned to service after being grounded following Flight 191 when Flight 901 occurred. Flight 901 was the third deadliest accident of a DC-10, following Turkish Airways Flight 981 and American Airlines Flight 191.
The crash spelled the end of commercially-operated Antarctic sightseeing flights - Air New Zealand cancelled all its Antarctic flights after Flight 901, and Qantas suspended its Antarctic flights in February 1980, only returning on a limited basis again in 1994.
Almost all of the aircraft's wreckage still lies where it came to rest on the slopes of Mount Erebus, under a layer of snow and ice. During warm periods, when snow recedes, it is still visible from the air.
A television miniseries, Erebus: The Aftermath, focusing on the investigation and the Royal Commission of Inquiry, was broadcast in New Zealand and Australia in 1988.
The phrase &quot;an orchestrated litany of lies&quot; entered New Zealand popular culture for some years.282930
In the New Zealand Queen's Birthday Honours list in June 2007 Captain Gordon Vette was awarded the ONZM (Officer of the New Zealand Order of Merit), recognising his services in assisting Justice Mahon during the Erebus Inquiry. Vette's book, Impact Erebus, provides a commentary of the flight, its crash and the subsequent investigations.
In 2008, Justice Mahon was posthumously awarded the Jim Collins Memorial Award by the New Zealand Airline Pilots Association for exceptional contributions to air safety, &quot;in forever changing the general approach used in transport accidents investigations world wide.&quot; 31
In 2009, Air New Zealand's CEO Rob Fyfe apologised to all those affected who did not receive appropriate support and compassion from the company following the incident, and unveiled a commemorative sculpture at its headquarters.3233
The registration of the crashed aircraft, ZK-NZP, has not been reissued.
Memorials
A wooden cross was erected above Scott Base to commemorate the accident. It was replaced in 1986 with an aluminium cross after the original was eroded by low temperatures, wind and moisture.
The memorial for the 16 passengers that were unidentifiable and the 28 whose bodies were never found is at Waikumete Cemetery in Glen Eden, Auckland. Beside the memorial is a Japanese cherry tree, planted as a memorial to the 24 Japanese passengers who died.34
A memorial to the crew members of Flight 901 is located adjacent to Auckland Airport, on Tom Pearce Drive at the eastern end of the airport zone.35
See also
Tourism in Antarctica
Accidents and incidents in aviation
Ansett New Zealand Flight 703
New Zealand National Airways Corporation Flight 441
EGPWS
List of New Zealand disasters by death toll
Sensory illusions in aviation
Footnotes
At the time of the crash, Air New Zealand's IATA code was TE, a relic from its predecessor Tasman Empire Airways Limited (TEAL). The airlines's IATA code would later change to the present NZ.
Before 1992, McMurdo Station didn't observe daylight savings, meaning during the summer months, mainland New Zealand was one hour ahead (UTC+13) of McMurdo Station (UTC+12).36
References
Further reading
NZAVA Operation Deep Freeze - The New Zealand Story, 2002.
Operation Overdue&lt;U+2013&gt;NZAVA Archives 2002.
C.H.N. L'Estrange, The Erebus enquiry: a tragic miscarriage of justice, Auckland, Air Safety League of New Zealand, 1995
Stuart Macfarlane, The Erebus papers: edited extracts from the Erebus proceedings with commentary, Auckland, Avon Press, 1991
Report of the Royal Commission to Inquire into the Crash on Mount Erebus, Antarctica of a DC10 Aircraft Operated by Air New Zealand Limited (66 Mb file), Wellington, Government Printer, 1981 (located at Archives New Zealand; item number ABVX 7333 W4772/5025/3/79-139 part 3)
R Chippendale, Air New Zealand McDonnell-Douglas DC10-30 ZK-NZP, Ross Island, Antarctica 28 November 1979, Office of Air Accidents Investigation, New Zealand Ministry of Transport, Wellington, 1980 (only some parts there)
Air New Zealand History Page, including a section about Erebus
External links
The Erebus Story - Loss of TE901 (includes Newspaper Articles and Video footage) - New Zealand Air Line Pilots' Association
Aviation Safety Network: Transcript of flight 901
The original brochure advertising Air New Zealand flights to Antarctica
(audio file) ABC Radio National program &quot;Ockham's Razor&quot;: &quot;Arthur Marcell takes us through some of the events leading up to the crash and has a few questions for modern navigators.&quot; transcript
NZ Special Service Medal (Erebus) 2006
Erebus disaster (NZHistory.net.nz)&lt;U+2013&gt;includes previously unpublished images and sound files
Erebus Aircraft Accident&lt;U+2013&gt;Christchurch City Libraries
Erebus for Kids&lt;U+2013&gt;This site is for young school children to provide information about the Erebus Tragedy.
de:Air-New-Zealand-Flug 901 fr:Vol 901 Air New Zealand ko:&lt;U+C5D0&gt;&lt;U+C5B4&gt;&lt;U+B274&gt;&lt;U+C9C8&gt;&lt;U+B79C&gt;&lt;U+B4DC&gt; 901&lt;U+D3B8&gt; &lt;U+CD94&gt;&lt;U+B77D&gt;&lt;U+C0AC&gt;&lt;U+ACE0&gt; id:Air New Zealand Penerbangan 901 nl:Air New Zealand-vlucht 901 ja:&lt;U+30CB&gt;&lt;U+30E5&gt;&lt;U+30FC&gt;&lt;U+30B8&gt;&lt;U+30FC&gt;&lt;U+30E9&gt;&lt;U+30F3&gt;&lt;U+30C9&gt;&lt;U+822A&gt;&lt;U+7A7A&gt;901&lt;U+4FBF&gt;&lt;U+30A8&gt;&lt;U+30EC&gt;&lt;U+30D0&gt;&lt;U+30B9&gt;&lt;U+5C71&gt;&lt;U+589C&gt;&lt;U+843D&gt;&lt;U+4E8B&gt;&lt;U+6545&gt; no:Air New Zealand Flight 901 pt:Voo Air New Zealand 901 simple:Air New Zealand Flight 901 tr:Yeni Zelanda Hava Yollar&lt;U+0131&gt;'n&lt;U+0131&gt;n 901 sefer say&lt;U+0131&gt;l&lt;U+0131&gt; u&lt;U+00E7&gt;u&lt;U+015F&gt;u zh:&lt;U+65B0&gt;&lt;U+897F&gt;&lt;U+862D&gt;&lt;U+822A&gt;&lt;U+7A7A&gt;901&lt;U+865F&gt;&lt;U+73ED&gt;&lt;U+6A5F&gt;&lt;U+7A7A&gt;&lt;U+96E3&gt;
Category:1979 in Antarctica Category:1979 in New Zealand Category:Accidents and incidents involving controlled flight into terrain Category:Accidents and incidents involving the McDonnell Douglas DC-10 Category:Air New Zealand Category:Aviation accidents and incidents in 1979 Category:Aviation accidents and incidents in Antarctica Category:Aviation accidents and incidents in New Zealand Category:Ross Island
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
CVR transcript from aviation-safety.net retrieved 06/02/2008↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
Tail of Air New Zealand plane at Mt Erebus↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
 &quot;a famous quote from NZs recent political past&quot;↩
 &quot;To quote a well-known phrase, there has been 'An orchestrated litany of lies'&quot;↩
 &quot;...a phrase that is likely to resound as did 'an orchestrated litany of lies' in another investigation&quot;↩
↩
Address from Rob Fyfe, Air New Zealand CEO, at Unveiling of Momentum Sculpture, Air New Zealand press release, 23 October 2009.↩
↩
↩
↩
http://www.nzhistory.net.nz/culture/erebus-disaster/hearing-the-news↩
