 The Georgia Aquarium, located in Atlanta, Georgia at Pemberton Place, is billed as the &quot;world's largest aquarium&quot; with more than 8 million US gallons (30,000 m&lt;U+00B3&gt;; 30,000,000 liters) of marine and fresh water, and more than 100,000 animals of 500 different species. The aquarium's notable specimens include young whale sharks (Norton, Alice, and Trixie) and four beluga whales (Nico, Natasha, Marina, and Maris). Funded mostly by a $250 million donation from Home Depot founder Bernie Marcus, the aquarium was built on a 20 acre (81,000 m&lt;U+00B2&gt;; 8 ha) site north of Centennial Olympic Park in downtown Atlanta. Marcus credited his 60th birthday dinner at the Monterey Bay Aquarium in 1990 as among the inspirations behind his desire to build an aquarium in Atlanta.
History and admissions
The Georgia Aquarium opened first on November 21, 2005 to annual pass holders and then on November 23,2005 to the general public. At $24.00 per adult, the price of admission to the non-profit aquarium is among the most expensive in the country. The aquarium has nevertheless far exceeded visitor expectations, welcoming its millionth guest on March 1, 2006, only ninety-eight days after opening. The aquarium sold over 290,000 annual passes for its first year, before sales were halted (to avoid a &quot;private club&quot; atmosphere, according to Aquarium Executive Director Jeff Swanagan).1 The Georgia Aquarium welcomed its three millionth guest on August 24, 2006.
Collection
The Georgia Aquarium contains between 100,000 to 120,000 fish and other sea creatures, representing more than five hundred species. On June 14, 2005, the total number of specimens was unveiled after having previously being reported as &quot;over 55,000&quot;. Marcus was quoted in the Atlanta Journal-Constitution as saying: &quot;I have been saying that we would have more than 55,000 fish; I just never said how many more.&quot; The fish were transported from Taiwan to the aquarium by UPS, which is headquartered in nearby Sandy Springs. in 42 tanks aboard an MD-11. UPS donated the cost of the shipping, estimated at over US$200,000.
The four most famous specimens, Ralph, Norton, Alice and Trixie are four young whale sharks from Taiwan. Ralph and Norton were with the Georgia Aquarium since its opening, Alice and Trixie joined the aquarium June 3, 2006 (the four whale sharks are named after characters from The Honeymooners). This is the first time whale sharks have been kept in an aquarium outside of Asia. The sharks are kept in a 6.2 million gallon (23.5 million liter) exhibit.
On January 11, 2007, Ralph passed away from unknown causes.12
The aquarium is also home to four 11 foot (3 meter) long beluga whales. Two males named Nico and Gasper were rescued from a Mexico City amusement park. On January 2, 2007, Gasper was euthanized due to health issues.2 The three females are on breeding loan from the New York Aquarium. The aquarium is among six other US aquariums, including Chicago's Shedd Aquarium, with belugas in their collections.
Exhibits
The aquatic animals are displayed in five different galleries, each of which corresponds to a specific environment. At the left as one enters the aquarium is the Georgia Explorer exhibit, geared especially towards children. It features a number of touch tanks with rays and sharks as well as exhibits featuring sea turtles and the wildlife of Gray's Reef - a National Marine Sanctuary off the Georgia Coast. The second exhibit, River Scout, also reflects regional environments. It features an overhead river where visitors can see North American fish from the bottom up. In addition to local specimens, exhibits display piranha, electric fish, and other unusual freshwater life. The third section of the aquarium, Cold Water Quest, features animals from the polar regions of the world and contains most of the mammals in the aquarium's collection. This exhibit includes beluga whales in the aquarium's second largest habitat, California sea lions, Japanese spider crabs, and African black-footed penguins. The fourth and most impressive exhibit, entitled Ocean Voyager, includes the vast majority of the aquarium's water and almost 100,000 fish. This exhibit is designed to feature the life of the Mesoamerican Barrier Reef System, and showcases the aquarium's whale sharks, as well as a 100 foot (30 meter) underwater tunnel and the world's second largest viewing window. The final exhibit takes an artistic turn, as the Tropical Diver exhibit features many curious and haunting forms of aquatic life including a living reef with live coral. The aquarium also features a &quot;4D&quot; movie and other attractions, including in the Ocean Voyager - Journey With Giants exhibit hall where the Chedd-Angier-Lewis production company, with Electrosonic Inc., has produced the Open Ocean Touchwall, a dynamic, interactive projection for species identification. This is a virtual aquarium where larger than life, fully articulated 3-D renderings of Open Ocean fish swim across six panels assembled to simulate a tank. Guests are invited to reach out and place hands or fingers on the fish. As they do so, fun and informative content bubbles appear to educate the guest about the particular species they have chosen.
The aquarium was designed by Atlanta-based architecture firm Thompson, Ventulett, Stainback &amp; Associates (TVS). In addition, TVS Interiors did the interior design of the facility as well as the design of the two retail shops located inside the aquarium.
Conservation
 According to aquarium founder Bernard Marcus, the aquarium's conservation and environmental mission is just as important as its status as an attraction. Long before opening, the aquarium was already working with Georgia Tech and Georgia State University in Atlanta and the University of Georgia in Athens to help save endangered species through education and research programs.
The acquisition of the male beluga whales, previously suffering in an inadequate environment, was hailed by Marcus as a prime example of the type of conservation activities the Aquarium should be involved with. Approximately 100 tarpon stranded in a tidal pool at Skidaway Island, off the Georgia coast, were rescued for the collection. Coral used in exhibits at the Aquarium is manmade in a collaboration between Georgia Tech and the University of the South Pacific, produced by suspending blocks of pumice over a reef near the village of Tagaqe, Fiji for eight months so that seaweeds and reef invertebrates could establish colonies.
Facilities
 The Georgia Aquarium, the world&lt;U+2019&gt;s largest at the time of its opening in November 2005, encompasses 550,000 sq. feet (11.6 acres; 4.7 hectares) of covered space. It holds eight million gallons (thirty million liters) of fresh and salt water and houses more than 100,000 fish and animals. The blue metal and glass exterior of the aquarium was designed to resemble a giant ark breaking through a wave. The ship&lt;U+2019&gt;s hull appears to emerge from two large buildings that feature curved, flowing roofs that were designed to represent ocean swells. The record for largest aquarium in the world is highly contested; however, Dubai's three story Dubai Mall aquarium claims to be the world's largest when it opens in the new Burj Dubai project.
With an accelerated 27-month schedule, the project timeline for the construction of the aquarium was aggressive. To facilitate the phased construction activities that were essential to meeting the project schedule, two-ply asphalt BUR was installed over a lightweight concrete deck. This temporary roof allowed for expedited construction and the associated roof traffic. The final stage included installation of the light gray FiberTite roofing system, which was selected to match the gray wall panels. The building of the aquarium was contracted by Brasfield and Gorrie, a General Contractor headquartered in Birmingham, Alabama.
In addition to the massive habitats that are the core of the aquarium, the facility includes the 16,400 square foot (1,520 m&lt;U+00B2&gt;) Oceans Ballroom - a banquet hall that can host events for up to 1100 seated or 1600 at a reception. The hall features two 10 x 28 foot (3 x 9 meter) windows into the exhibits housing the whale sharks and beluga whales. It can also be subdivided into three smaller spaces for events. Chef Wolfgang Puck's company will manage catering services for this facility. The aquarium also includes a fairly large food court with tables extending into the main lobby. The costs of building the aquarium escalated beyond Marcus' original US$250 million donation. To complete the facility without scaling back plans, six local companies — AirTran Airways, BellSouth, Georgia-Pacific, The Home Depot, Southern Company, and SunTrust Banks — signed on as presenting sponsors for exhibits.
Location
Originally proposed for the Atlantic Station development in Midtown Atlanta, the Georgia Aquarium is located in downtown Atlanta, just north of Centennial Olympic Park. In addition to the Park and the Aquarium, within a short distance are the Georgia Dome, the Georgia World Congress Center, Philips Arena, and CNN Center. The Coca-Cola Company donated 9 acres (40,000 m&lt;U+00B2&gt;; 4 ha) of land to the site and will build a new World of Coca-Cola attraction on the remaining property it owns adjacent to the aquarium. The site is named Pemberton Place in honor of Coca-Cola creator John Pemberton.
Even before opening, the Georgia Aquarium helped drive new development in the area aiding efforts by the City of Atlanta and Central Atlanta Progress, a group of local business leaders, to revitalize downtown. In December 2004, a $300 million office and hotel development was announced for a nearby site. The complex is named Allen Plaza in commemoration of former Atlanta mayor Ivan Allen Jr and includes office space for the Southern Company and accounting firm Ernst &amp; Young, as well as W Hotel.
Gallery
Image:GaAqTurtle.jpg|Loggerhead Sea Turtle Image:GaAqBeluga.jpg|Beluga Whale, one of four Image:GaAqShark.jpg|Whale Shark overhead in the tunnel Image:GaAqViewingTheatre.jpg|Sawfish in the viewing theatre Image:GaAqSeahorse.jpg|Seahorse Image:GaAqStarfish.jpg|Sea Star Image:GaAqAnemones.jpg|Anemones in a touch tank Image:GaAqSharkOverhead.jpg|Guitarfish in the Ocean Voyager tunnel Image:GaAqDiver.jpg|Scuba Diver cleaning some of the glass
References
Cited references
General references
Tharpe, Jim (June 3, 2005) Aquarium lands two whale sharks Atlanta Journal-Constitution
Tharpe, Jim (June 14, 2005) Surprise at aquarium: 100,000 fish, in from Asia Atlanta Journal-Constitution
Seabrook, Charles (July 8, 2005) Georgia Aquarium acquires belugas from Mexico Atlanta Journal-Constitution
Tharpe, Jim (August 14, 2005) Aquarium's lofty goal: 'Save planet' Atlanta Journal-Constitution
Tharpe, Jim (September 7, 2005) 6 companies help make up aquarium financing shortfall Atlanta Journal-Constitution
Tharpe, Jim (January 23, 2006) California sea showplace inspired Marcus' masterpiece Atlanta Journal-Constitution
External links
Georgia Aquarium website
Central Atlanta Progress aquarium information page
CNN.com - Big window to the sea
Google Earth - 3D Model
Georgia Aquarium Photos
es:Acuario de Georgia ko:&lt;U+C870&gt;&lt;U+C9C0&gt;&lt;U+C544&gt; &lt;U+C218&gt;&lt;U+C871&gt;&lt;U+AD00&gt; nl:Georgia Aquarium sv:Georgia Aquarium
Category:Aquaria in the United States Category:Atlanta, Georgia Category:2005 establishments
No fish story: Aquarium draws million in 3 months David E. Williams, CNN, 1 March 2006. Retrieved 24 August 2006↩
Gasper Press Release↩
