The Firebrand is a 1987 fantasy novel by American author Marion Zimmer Bradley. Set in the ancient Greek city of Troy, the novel is a re-telling of Homer's epic poem, the Iliad. The Firebrand is set from the point-of-view of Kassandra, the prophet daughter of king Priam of Troy, and also features other prominent characters from Greek mythology, giving readers a new perspective of each. As in the Iliad, Kassandra foresees catastrophe for her city but few pay heed to her warnings. In Bradley's story however, she is also presented as a strong and insightful woman, rather than a sufferer of insanity.
The novel has been described as belonging to the genres of revisionist history and feminist literature, and employs themes of gender, religion, and power. Bradley wrote it after the success of her 1983 novel The Mists of Avalon, a re-telling of the Arthurian legend from another female perspective. The Firebrand includes fewer elements of fantasy than her previous works to appeal to a wider readership. Bradley's only novel set in ancient Greece, her husband Walter H. Breen helped her research the story.
Simon &amp; Schuster released The Firebrand on October 1, 1987 in hardcover, and it was issued in paperback in September 1988. The Firebrand has been overshadowed by the popularity of Mists, receiving less attention and critical praise. Reviews of the book have ranged from mixed to positive, with many literary critics praising Bradley's ability to give new characterizations to legendary figures. It has been translated into at least twelve languages, beginning with Portuguese and French in 1989.
Synopsis
Volume One
In the wealthy and powerful city of Troy, the pregnant queen Hecuba experiences a prophetic dream which distresses her. When consulted, a priestess of the Great Goddess tells Hecuba and her husband, king Priam, that the dream indicates she will birth a son who will bring destruction to Troy. Priam declares that this boy must be exposed to death, but upon his birth three days later, Priam agrees to Hecuba's pleas and has him fostered by a shepherd on the slopes of Mount Ida. Priam names the boy Alexandros (later called Paris), and his twin sister, Alexandra, whom Hecuba keeps and decides to call Kassandra.
While visiting the temple of Apollo with her mother, six-year-old Kassandra experiences a vision of the god telling her she is to become &quot;His priestess&quot;. Further visions follow during the years, including one at the age of twelve that shows her Paris, who is now a shepherd. Kassandra asks her father of the boy's identity but he reacts angrily. Kassandra is sent to be fostered by Hecuba's sister Penthesilea, chief of the Amazons, a nomadic warrior tribe of only women. There, Kassandra comes to love their lifestyle, though it is not without its trials, and learns of her twin, continuing her visions of him. Kassandra sees the Judgement of Paris, in which her brother deems Aphrodite more beautiful than Athena or Hera &lt;U+2013&gt; Aphrodite rewards him by eventually promising the love of Helen of Sparta, daughter of Leda and Zeus.
In Colchis, ruled over by queen Imandra, Kassandra undergoes the rites of a priestess and is told that serving the Goddess is her destiny. At the age of fifteen, Kassandra is unhappily returned to her home. She arrives during a festival in time to see Paris win and be revealed to his true parents as their son. Despite the prophecy, Priam and Hecuba happily welcome him home. However, Hector and his other brothers, jealous of the attention and achievements Paris has suddenly garnered, suggest that he be sent abroad to treaty with king Agamemnon, who holds Priam's sister. Paris readily agrees.
Meanwhile, Kassandra begins training as a priestess of the temple of Apollo, despite misgivings that she is abandoning the Goddess. Part of her duties include helping care for the temple serpents, symbols of Python who Apollo is said to have slain. Paris returns to Troy with the beautiful Helen, wife of king Menelaus, and she is welcomed into the city. Kassandra's warnings that Helen will destroy Troy go unheeded, and Paris denounces his sister as a madwoman.
Volume Two
Later at the temple, Kassandra is assaulted by Khryse, a priest who disguises himself as Apollo in order to seduce her. She sees through his trick and fights him off, but the God feels insulted enough by her refusal to make her prophecies not believed in the city. Menelaus' brother Agamemnon uses Helen's flight as a pretext for war and soon begins launching daily raids on Troy, beginning the Trojan War. Kassandra spends more time with her family to help with daily tasks while the men, led by Hector, fight off the Akhaian invaders. The war continues in fits and bursts, despite the attempts of former Trojan ally Odysseus to end the conflict.
Two years into the war, Kassandra returns to Colchis to learn more of serpent lore, along the way encountering Penthesilea. Kassandra is unhappy to find that the Amazon and Kentaur nomadic ways of life are ending, with Penthesilea's tribe dwindling in number. Kassandra experiences a horrifying vision of Apollo firing arrows indiscriminately at both armies, a sign of his wrath, which prompts her to journey back home. Accompanied with an adopted infant daughter named Honey she found alongside the road, Kassandra returns to Troy and finds that the war is not going well for the city.
Soon after her return, Apollo takes the form of Khryse and spreads a plague in the Akhaians' camp in response to Agamemnon's sacrilegious refusal to return Khryse's daughter; the girl, who has been Agamemnon's prisoner for three years, is reluctantly returned to her father, and the Akhaian leader takes the concubine of the young warrior Akhilles as reparation for his loss. The furious Akhilles refuses to continue fighting. Menelaus and Paris duel each other, but Paris is able to flee the fight due to the intervention of Helen and Aphrodite.
Volume Three
Meanwhile, most of her family has come to think of Kassandra as mad, and become angry when she feels compelled to vocalize prophecies that foretell the end of Troy. Despite Kassandra's warnings, the city experiences an earthquake sent by Poseidon, killing the three young sons of Helen and Paris. After Patroklus is killed by Hector, his closest friend Akhilles again joins the fight to get his revenge &lt;U+2013&gt; Hector and his younger brother Troilus are killed, to the grief of everyone in Troy. Akhilles later also kills Penthesilea in battle, and soon after Kassandra fires a fatal poisoned arrow at his unprotected heel.
Poseidon sends an earthquake, knocking down Troy's defenses. The Akhaians flood into the city, and Kassandra and Honey are raped by the warrior Ajax. The women of Troy are divided up among the Akhaians, and Kassandra becomes the concubine of Agamemnon. She is freed at last when his wife Klytemnestra murders him upon their return to Mykenae. Kassandra makes her way back to Asia Minor, where in the desert, she hopes to recreate a kingdom of old&lt;U+2014&gt;one ruled by a powerful queen.
Main characters
Kassandra of Troy is the story's protagonist,1 and it is told from her perspective.23 It begins at an unidentified location, where an elderly Kassandra tiredly agrees to correct the Homeric version of the Trojan War that is told by a traveling minstrel.45 Kassandra recounts her life experiences at Troy and Colchis,6 and how she came to balk at the gender roles dictated by Trojan culture. Her tale also includes her inner turmoil over which deity she should be serving: the Goddess or Apollo.7
To her family Kassandra is early on known as the &quot;clever girl,&quot; while her older sister Polyxena is the &quot;proper, modest&quot;, and &quot;pretty one&quot;.8 Her parents intend for Kassandra to be brought up as a lady and eventually marry a nobleman, to her gradual displeasure.9 She often comes into conflict with her father, king Priam,10 who is variously characterized as cruel, violent, and power-hungry.11 Queen Hecuba and Kassandra are not close, with the former often disparaging her daughter for her prophecies.12 Though Hecuba grew up as an Amazon,1314 she has gradually come to adopt patriarchal Trojan customs as her own.1516
The warrior Hector is close to their sister Polyxena,17 and is described by Kassandra at one point as a bully.18 He disapproves of Kassandra's desire to be a warrior,19 but is much loved in the city.20 As an adult Kassandra later reflects, &quot;of all [Priam and Hecuba's children], Hector was closest to their hearts, and [she] the least loved. Was it only that she had always been so different from the others?&quot;21 Kassandra is happiest when she travels with the Amazons.22 Penthesilea, their chief, becomes the mother figure in Kassandra's life.23
Hector's wife, Andromache, is the elder daughter of queen Imandra; despite Colchis' matriarchal culture, she is content to adopt Trojan culture and be subservient to her husband. She and Kassandra become close,24 as does Kassandra with Helen, despite her initial distaste for the problems Helen brings to Troy.25 Despite being her twin, Paris shows a dislike for Kassandra.26 Early in the story, Bradley writes that his main character flaw is &quot;a total lack of interest in anything that did not relate to himself or contribute in some way to his own comfort and satisfaction.&quot;27
Development
The Firebrand was written by American author and editor Marion Zimmer Bradley (1930&lt;U+2013&gt;1999), best known for her Darkover science fiction series and popular 1983 novel, The Mists of Avalon, a re-telling of the Arthurian legend from the point of view of Arthur's antagonist, Morgan le Fay.2829 Though Bradley refused to label herself as a feminist,30 her works often dealt with themes of gender, religion, and power, particularly in historically patriarchal societies.3132 A self-described Christian,33 Bradley was also known for incorporating neopagan beliefs and viewpoints into her body of work; Carrol Fry of Northwest Missouri State University notes that although Bradley &quot;seemed rather contemptuous of many New Age concepts that most New-Pagans hold dear,&quot; she &quot;clearly identifies with the values of feminist Pagans&quot; through her writings.34  These views influenced Bradley's writing of The Firebrand, which she penned after publishing The Mists of Avalon in 1983.35 The Encyclopedia of Fantasy observed that after Mists, Bradley designed stories with a stronger literary appeal in an effort to appeal to a wider readership; rather than focus on the &quot;straightforward&quot; fantasy genre, Bradley's later works often centered around strong lead characters in &quot;mytho-historic settings,&quot; with fewer elements of fantasy.36 For example, in The Firebrand the Kentaurs are depicted as a nomadic tribe of short, naked riders of horses rather than as the half-human, half-horsemen legends traditionally portray.37
The Firebrand was Bradley's second re-telling of a famous legend,38 and her only novel set in ancient Greece.39 In deciding to re-envision legends from a female perspective, the author stated that she had an interest to &quot;hear more about the human realities&quot; surrounding well-known stories, but did not believe this constituted a feminist writing style.40 In an interview with Lisa See of Publishers Weekly, Bradley said she viewed the Trojan War legend as an example of masculine culture dominating and obfuscating female viewpoints and contributions. She explained: 
Unlike Mists, which featured a wide range of Arthurian legends that Bradley drew upon as source material, the author cited few sources while writing The Firebrand.41 Bradley credits her then-husband, author Walter H. Breen, with helping her research the book and create the story. Breen was knowledgeable about ancient Greek history and its language; according to Bradley, he persuaded her to use linguisticly more correct transliterations of the characters' names, such as Akhilles rather than the more known form of Achilles.42 Though Kassandra's fate remains unknown in the Iliad, Bradley found inspiration for the character's ending from an inscription at the Archaeological Museum in Athens, which mentioned her descendents.4344 Bradley also believed that this inscription provided the historical basis for Kassandra's existence.4546
Themes and analysis
Gender roles
Ajax raping Cassandra on an Attic red-figure pottery cup, c. 440-430 BC: Classical depictions of Cassandra show her with characteristics associated with insanity, such as nudity and wild hair.
In the original story found in the Iliad, female characters receive little attention; though they are often crucial to progressing events, they have no developed identities of their own, instead being defined by motherhood, wifehood, and sisterhood.47 Cassandra is described in that story as &quot;the loveliest of [Priam's] lovely daughters,&quot; but does not speak at all.4849 Today she is remembered for both portending the city's doom and for not being believed by its inhabitants, who think she is mad; on ancient Greek pottery she is depicted as half naked with long, wild hair,50 and Shakespeare's 1602 play Troilus and Cressida characterizes her as an insane woman.51 After the Akhaians use the Trojan Horse to gain entry into Troy, the Aeneid and other accounts relay how Cassandra is raped by Ajax52 and then taken captive by Agamemnon, later killed alongside him by his angry wife Clytemnestra.535455 By setting her story from the female perspective, Bradley gives women, especially the formerly silenced Cassandra, a voice by re-telling the legend from their eyes.5657 Here, Kassandra is no lunatic, but rather a strong and insightful woman, yet still misunderstood by many of those around her.58 She is allowed to survive in order to record a female counter-narrative.59
The Firebrand has been seen to employ similar themes to Bradley's other works,6061 including the swapping of gender roles, where &quot;women are the true heroes,&quot; while the &quot;proud, arrogant&quot; men who lead Troy to doom &quot;fail to invoke the reader's sympathy.&quot;62 Indeed, the title of the novel refers to the male character Paris and the destruction he brings to Troy.6364 The Firebrand has been perceived as belonging in the revisionist history genre,65 as it fits into a &quot;reinvent[ion of] stories that are either historical or derived from myth/legend but often taken to be historical,&quot; and then told with a different narrative.66 Despite Bradley's views, the novel has also been seen as an example of feminist literature.67 Bradley introduces feminist ideals by equating the patriarchal culture with oppressive tendencies;68 perceived to have been scorned by the male god Apollo, Kassandra is not believed by Trojan citizens because of her gender.69
Dorschel writes that because there is &quot;no humanity or compassion in this masculine world,&quot; characters traditionally associated with noble, positive qualities are instead &quot;stripped of their own glamor&quot; and portrayed in a negative light &lt;U+2013&gt; Akhilles for instance is a &quot;mad dog&quot; who rapes Penthesilea as an act of &quot;cold-blooded&quot; contempt, rather than as an act of sudden love upon causing her death.70 Agamemnon and Menelaus are rendered as patriarchal stereotypes.71 In her entry for Science Fiction &amp; Fantasy Book Review Annual, Mary-Kay Bray proposes that Bradley's account makes these traditional heroes seem more human and flawed, even if they are also less admirable.72
Religion and gender
Bradley believed that &quot;cultural shock, the clash of alien cultures, is the essence of literature and drama,&quot; and incorporated this viewpoint into many of her works.73 The Firebrand is set in such a time of change, and Kassandra is caught between new and old cultures.7475 Despite being ruled by a king and worshiping the male god Apollo, the Trojans still respect the ancient cult surrounding the Earth Mother; in Colchis, the powerful queen Imandra rules alone but her way of life is represented as declining &lt;U+2013&gt; she is aging and uncertain of her successor, and the impoverished areas surrounding Colchis contain two other dwindling civilizations: the Amazons and the Kentaurs.76
Literary critics have observed elements of neopaganism in the novel. Bradley often included characteristics of neopaganism into her stories as she explored the intersection of gender and religion.77 While neopaganism lacks a singular definition, many followers have come to define it as a primitive, matriarchal religion that &quot;flourished&quot; in Western Europe, centered around the worship of a &quot;Mother Goddess&quot;, and became largely decimated by Christianity.78 Fry writes that &quot;a basic assumption [in The Firebrand] is that the people of ancient Greece had worshiped the Goddess prior to the arrival of the Akhaians,&quot; a people who brought with them a &quot;male warrior pantheon of Gods ... and gradually subverted the old ways.&quot;79 As Bradley's Penthesilea tells a young Kassandra, &quot;But remember, child: before ever Apollo Sun Lord came to rule these lands, our Horse Mother &lt;U+2013&gt; the Great Mare, the Earth Mother from whom we all are born &lt;U+2013&gt; she was here.&quot;80
Amazons by Tischbein, c. 1820: through Kassandra, Bradley shows her idealization of the Amazons, especially in the wake of a rising patriarchal culture.
In a similar vein with Mists, The Firebrand &quot;intertwines two belief systems&quot; and combines neopaganism with elements of Greek mythology.81 Robin Anne Reid, author of Women in Science Fiction and Fantasy, also found similarities between the two novels, as they serve &quot;parallel purposes&quot; by retelling an old legend from the female perspective. Both stories deal with the confrontation between female-based, Earth-centered belief systems and rising patriarchal religions.82 This religious dichotomy appears firstly as a conflict between Apollo and the Goddess, and later in the novel as a confrontation between the Akhaian and Trojan gods.838485 By the tradition told in the novel, serpents represent the Mother Goddess' prominent place in religious life, as well as immortality, rebirth, and regeneration. Readers are told that Python, a female snake deity and symbol of the Goddess, was slain by the Hellenistic Apollo, thus representing the destruction of feminine social, political, and religious power.8687
Bradley uses the story's various female characters to also create a feminist dichotomy; Kassandra and Penthesilea represent the &quot;feminist side&quot; in their pursuit of independence, while many of the other women, such as Andromache, Hecuba, and Helen, &quot;subordinate themselves to patriarchal traditions, values, goods.&quot;8889 The loss of this matriarchal culture has been viewed as the novel's main theme.90 Bradley writes of the power of women in many of her works, including Mists and the Darkover series,91 and The Firebrand continues this by depicting Kassandra in an idealized world &lt;U+2013&gt; the Amazons follow the Earth Goddess but are slowly dwindling in the wake of the patriarchal &quot;male warrior pantheon of Gods.&quot;92 Through Kassandra's experiences with the Amazons, Bradley shows that she clearly idealizes this group of women.93 
Release
The novel was published on October 1, 1987 by New York-based company Simon &amp; Schuster,949596 and was released on paperback in September 1988.97 In 1989, The Firebrand was translated and published into Portuguese and French by A. B. Pinheiro de Lemos and Hubert Tezenas, respectively. Other translations followed, as it has been adapted into at least ten other languages, including Italian, German, Lithuanian, Japanese, and modern Greek.9899
Reception
The Firebrand has received less critical attention and success than Bradley's more popular novel The Mists of Avalon, which has tended to overshadow it.100101 The Firebrand has received mixed to positive reviews from mainstream literary critics. Magill Book Reviews applauded Bradley's faithfulness to the source material found in the Iliad, despite the &quot;startling liberties [she takes] with Homer's work.&quot;102 However, the reviewer found that her themes of gender and religion, &quot;rendered artfully and gracefully in [The Mists of Avalon], becomes tiresome with repetition.&quot;103 Bradley acknowledged that some readers would take umbrage at the changes she rendered to the Trojan legend, but explained &quot;had I been content with the account in the Iliad, there would have been no reason to write a novel. Besides, the Iliad stops short just at the most interesting point, leaving the writer to conjecture about the end from assorted legends and traditions.&quot;104 The Library Journal recommended readers familiarize themselves with Greek mythology before beginning the book, and noted the author &quot;makes a strong statement about the desirability of women having control of their own destinies and about the cruelties men inflict upon them.&quot;105 The Encyclopedia of Fantasy opined that The Firebrand and her 1994 novel The Forest House &quot;display [Bradley's] talent for plot, character, vision and fine storytelling.&quot;106
Reviewing for The Globe and Mail, H.J. Kirchhoff compared the novel to Mists, finding that the former &quot;is neither as refreshing nor as lovely, even though it is a pretty good read.&quot;107 Kirchhoff thought that The Firebrand contained too many similarities to Bradley's previous novels, as &quot;the interlarding of old story and feminist ideology seems forced,&quot; though he &quot;ironically&quot; found praise in her &quot;flesh-and-blood&quot; depiction of the men associated with the legend.108 Vicki McCash of the Sun Sentinel commended the novel for making the legendary characters &quot;breathe and feel&quot; and for giving a &quot;refreshing&quot; twist to the ancient story. The reviewer continued, &quot;From the first pages, the reader is gripped in the magic of ancient Troy. These stories have been revered for centuries, but in The Firebrand they are retold to become one epic novel, not only of heroes and gods, but of heroines and goddesses and of change in the very fabric of society.&quot;109 McCash did however speculate that male readers might be troubled by the negative portrayals of their sex, but that Bradley attempted to avoid this by inputting a few &quot;sympathetic&quot; men such as Aeneas and several &quot;evil&quot; women such as Klytemnestra.110 Virginia Judge of The Herald called it a &quot;fascinating, but lengthy tale,&quot; and especially praised depictions of the old religion.111 She did however criticize the ending for seeming &quot;contrived.&quot;112
A reviewer for the English Journal praised the novel, as it found one of its main strengths to be &quot;its ability to entertain the reader with characters who are basically faithful to their origins in the Iliad, yet at the same time rounder, fuller, and more personally engaging.&quot;113 Bradley, the Journal noted, &quot;fleshes out the stereotypes on which the characterization in the epic poem rests &lt;U+2013&gt; the cold calculating Achilles; crafty, gregarious Odysseus; frustrated Cassandra &lt;U+2013&gt; with convincing dialogue which not only carries the plot but gives reference to other events both mythical and historical.&quot;114 In an overview of Bradley's body of work, Encyclopedia of Fantasy and Horror Fiction author Don D'Amassa called the novel &quot;one of her better fantasies.&quot;115 Bradley's works have earned praise from feminist critics, who have particularly lauded her ability to portray multidimensional women as &quot;revered conduit[s] of nature-based religion and mysticism&quot; as seen with the character of Kassandra.116 The English Journal contended that &quot;Bradley tempers the bitterness and cynicism of Homer's Cassandra, presenting instead a woman confused and tormented by knowledge on which she is powerless to act.&quot;117 At the 1988 Locus Awards, The Firebrand was voted the twentieth best fantasy novel of the year.118
See also
List of fantasy novels
Trojan War in popular culture
References
Sources
Category:1980s fantasy novels Category:1987 novels Category:Feminist fiction Category:Parallel literature Category:American fantasy novels Category:American alternate history novels Category:Novels set in Ancient Greece Category:Novels set in Ancient Troy Category:Novels by Marion Zimmer Bradley
Sharp, p. 249.↩
Thompson, p. 192.↩
Bradley, pp. 1&lt;U+2013&gt;4.↩
Dorschel, p. 155.↩
Thompson, p. 191.↩
Bray, pp. 106&lt;U+2013&gt;07.↩
Bradley, pp. 53, 141.↩
Thompson, pp. 192&lt;U+2013&gt;93.↩
Bradley, pp. 38&lt;U+2013&gt;39, 195, 248.↩
Dorschel, p. 177.↩
Bradley, pp. 29, 153, 167.↩
Bradley, p. 13.↩
Thompson, p. 193.↩
Dorschel, pp. 167&lt;U+2013&gt;68.↩
Bradley, p. 464.↩
Bradley, p. 112.↩
Bradley, pp. 156&lt;U+2013&gt;58.↩
Bradley, p. 481.↩
Bradley, p. 470.↩
Bradley, pp. 82, 150.↩
Bradley, pp. 117&lt;U+2013&gt;19, 187.↩
Bradley, pp. 228, 249&lt;U+2013&gt;50, 272, 299.↩
Bradley, pp. 146, 193.↩
Bradley, p. 59.↩
Paxson, pp. 11, 18.↩
↩
Paxson, p. 113.↩
Paxson, pp. 113&lt;U+2013&gt;14.↩
Fry, pp. 71&lt;U+2013&gt;72, 78.↩
Fry, p. 77.↩
Paxson, p. 117.↩
Clute &amp; Grant, p. 135.↩
Dorschel , p. 179.↩
Crosby, p. 54.↩
Dorschel , p. 151.↩
Sharp, p. 243.↩
Bradley, Acknowledgments.↩
Bradley, Postscript.↩
Bowen Raddeker, n.p.↩
Dorschel, pp. 152, 156&lt;U+2013&gt;57.↩
Homer, Iliad, xiii, 363&lt;U+2013&gt;367.↩
Shakespeare, Troilus and Cressida, Act 2, Scene 2, 96&lt;U+2013&gt;125.↩
Virgil, Aeneid ii. 403↩
Aeschylus, Agamemnon, 1370&lt;U+2013&gt;75.↩
Dorschel, pp. 152&lt;U+2013&gt;54.↩
Dorschel, pp. 155&lt;U+2013&gt;56, 166.↩
Crosby, pp. 54&lt;U+2013&gt;55.↩
Dorschel, pp. 170&lt;U+2013&gt;71.↩
Komar, p. 174.↩
Woods Roberts, p. 113.↩
Bradley, p. 483.↩
Crosby, p. 17.↩
Crosby, p. 43.↩
Dorschel, p. 172.↩
Dorschel, pp. 175&lt;U+2013&gt;76.↩
Bray, p. 106.↩
Sharp, p. 244.↩
Fry, p. 68.↩
Bradley, p. 58.↩
Fry, p. 76.↩
Reid, p. 247.↩
Dorschel, pp. 166&lt;U+2013&gt;68, 178&lt;U+2013&gt;79.↩
Crosby, p. 56.↩
Dorschel, pp. 178&lt;U+2013&gt;79.↩
Smith, n.p.↩
Dorschel, pp. 166&lt;U+2013&gt;68.↩
Dorschel, p. 166.↩
Fry, pp. 70&lt;U+2013&gt;71.↩
Fry, p. 75.↩
 ↩
↩
↩
 ↩
↩
 Click on each country to see translated titles of the novel.↩
Dorschel, p. 152.↩
 ↩
 ↩
 ↩
↩
↩
Frederick, p. 85.↩
D'Ammassa, p. 34.↩
Snodgrass, p. 79.↩
↩
