Last Hero in China is a 1993 Hong Kong film written and directed by Wong Jing. It is a derivative of the Once Upon a Time in China film series, and unlike other imitations, it can be considered a spin-off or parody to some extent. It was released after the first three films in the Once Upon a Time in China franchise. The film starred Jet Li as Chinese folk hero Wong Fei-hung and the action choreography was done by Yuen Woo-ping. However Last Hero in China differs greatly in tone from the Once Upon a Time in China films as it contains stronger elements of violence and broader, more slapstick, comedy.
Alternate titles
Claws of Steel
Deadly China Hero
Iron Rooster vs. Centipede
Plot
Wong Fei-Hung has now his own school of Kung fu, but the latter becomes too small for his numerous student. Two of his followers succeed in finding an agreement with the owner of an idle house. The school thus changes location... Unfortunately, the school of Fei-Hung is next to a &quot;love hotel&quot;, what is for him unacceptable. Furthermore, a new general wants absolutely his loss, and it is true to give free rein to his traffics...
Cast
Jet Li as Wong Fei-hung
Sharla Cheung as Ti Yin-er
Dicky Cheung as So
Bryan Leung as Leung Fu
Anita Yuen as Miss Nine
Natalis Chan as Mass Tar Wong
Alan Chui as Lui Yat-siu
Kingdom Yuen as San Gu
Linda Cheung as hooker
Gordon Liu as Master Liu Hung
Dion Lam as convicted robber and rapist
Wong Tin-lam as member of Moral Reform Society
Pak Man-biu as Uncle Cheung
Szema Wah Lung as member of four com. associations
Law Ho-kai as Robert
Chung Fat as Yuen Lung
Yuen Miu as Yuen Po
Jimmy Au as Yuen Fu
Julie Lee as woman chased through the woods
Jackson Ng as young master molesting Yin-er
Jue Tit-woh as Yin-er's father
Isabel Leung as hooker
Gam Biu as magistrate
Chun Kwai-bo as Nun Yah's bad monk
Chu Tau as constable who beat Mass Tar Wong
Chow Gam-kong as young master's servant
Lui Tat as master of Nun Yah Temple
Ku Tin-yi as hooker
Roy Filler as Benjamin
Chan Siu-wah as monk
Ling Chi-hung as landlord's representative
Lee Hang as constable
Lam Kwok-git as constable / Master Wong's disciple
Cheung Chun-hung as Master Wong's disciple
So Wai-naam as Master Wong's disciple
Ho Si-wan
Lam Foo-wai
External links
Category:Films directed by Wong Jing Category:Martial arts films Category:Hong Kong films Category:Cantonese-language films Category:1993 films Category:Kung fu films Category:Films directed by Yuen Woo-ping Category:1990s action films
