Tilted Thunder Rail Birds (TTRB) is a Seattle, Washington based, all-female, banked track roller derby league. They are a 501(c)3 nonprofit organization run by a volunteer force of skaters and league members committed to promoting and raising awareness of women's roller derby, especially banked track roller derby. TTRB is composed of strong, friendly, intelligent, enthusiastic women from all walks of life pursuing emotional growth and physical strength by challenging their perceived limits. As a league, they also wish to promote mental and physical empowerment, development of skills, loyalty on and off the track, individuality, and friendship - throughout the entire sport, both locally and nationally.
The modern reincarnation of community-based, Do-It-Yourself banked track roller derby is only just beginning to experience the kind of growth that flat-track roller derby saw only a few years ago. Not only is TTRB the only modern banked track league in the Pacific Northwest, it is one of only a small handful of modern DIY banked track leagues in the country. Modern, DIY leagues who have already built their banked tracks include: Los Angeles Derby Dolls, San Diego Derby Dolls, TXRD (Austin), Outwest Outlaws Roller Derby (Oklahoma City), Arizona Derby Dames (Phoenix), OC Roller Girls (Orange County, CA), South Side Roller Derby (Houston, TX), and Reno Roller Girls. Even though there are over 400 modern flat-track leagues in the United States, TTRB was only the 7th roller derby league to build a banked track in the nation. Even more unique, TTRB is the only one of these banked-track leagues who is a 501(c)3 nonprofit organization!
Tilted Thunder has four home teams, an All Star travel team, and two junior derby programs: Peeps and Chicklets.
Mission statement: As a 501(c)3 nonprofit organization, Tilted Thunder is committed to fostering serious competition on a national and international level, developing amateur athletes for competition, and promoting the physical and mental strength and independent spirit of amateur female athletes.
Tilted Thunder is a founding member of the Roller Derby Coalition of Leagues.1
2 . 3. 4 .
Teams
Tilted Thunder is 1 of 12 active banked track roller derby leagues in the country. The skaters bout under the Roller Derby Coalition of Leagues (RDCL)5 . Between 2008 and 2011 Tilted Thunder was made up of two teams, Red Team and Purple Team. In 2011 the first season featured the four current intra-league competitors:
The Rolling Blackouts
Season 1 Champions
Royal Crush
Saint Hellions
Sugar Skulls
Skaters who do not skate on home teams are called &quot;Chicks&quot;. They hone their skills in the &quot;Chick Pool&quot; until a home team drafts them.
The All Star team is TTRB's travel team.
Peeps and Chicklets (Junior's Program)
Tilted Thunder expanded banked track roller derby to young women in January 2011.
Chicklets
Chicklets are from 7 to 13 years old.
Peeps
Peeps range from 11 to 17 years old. They play full contact roller derby.
2012 Season
Come watch the Tilted Thunder Rail Birds play on the only banked track in the Pacific Northwest. With speeds up to 30 mph, the hits are harder and speeds are faster!!!
Tilted Thunder Rail Birds bouts at Comcast Arena (Everett). Single-bout tickets are available at Comcast Arena at the Everett box office or online at www.comcastarenaeverett.com, at Fast Girl Skates or from your favorite Rail Bird.
January 29th, 3:30pm
Blackouts vs. Sugar Skulls, Hellions vs. Royal Crush
April 1st, 3:30pm
Blackouts vs. Royal Crush, Special Guest Team vs. Saint Hellions
May 5th, 5:00pm
Skulls vs. Hellions, Spokannibals vs. Crush
June 30th, 5:00pm
Blackouts vs. Hellions, Rainy City vs. Skulls
July 21st, 5:00pm
Crush vs. Skulls, Trouble Brewing vs. Blackouts
August 18th, 5:00pm
Championships
Battle on the Bank
From June 1st-3rd, 2012, the Tilted Thunder Rail Birds host Battle on the Bank V, the US Banked Track Roller Derby National Tournament6 .
Community Involvement
Tilted Thunder Rail Birds are always reaching out to help make their community a better place. Below are only some of their most recent volunteer projects:
&lt;U+2022&gt; Green Seattle Partnership - Cleaned the Burke-Gilman trail of trash and blackberry bushes.
&lt;U+2022&gt; Relay for Life - raised money for Cancer Survivors
&lt;U+2022&gt; Pennies for Peace - collected pennies for education opportunities for children in Pakistan and Afghanistan
&lt;U+2022&gt; Save your A@* for the Track- Tilted Thunder hosted a self defense class taught by Joanna Factor with Strategic Living
&lt;U+2022&gt; Harborview Medical Center- Collected toiletries for ICU Patient family members
&lt;U+2022&gt; Parent Child Assistance Program- toy/gift drive
&lt;U+2022&gt; Northwest Harvest- Collected food for Seattle food bank
&lt;U+2022&gt; Second Harvest Japan- Skate for Japan fundraiser at Lynnwood to aid those devastated by the Japan earthquake
&lt;U+2022&gt; Bellevue Arthritis Walk 2011- TTRB skaters led the walk at Crossroads Park on May 21, 2011
&lt;U+2022&gt; Toys for Tots - Toy drive
&lt;U+2022&gt; Housing Hope - Toiletry drive
See Also
List of roller derby leagues
History of roller derby
Battle on the Bank
References
External Links
Potential Fresh Meat Roller Derby Practice Squad
Tilted Thunder's Flight School and Tryouts Information
Category:Sports in Seattle, Washington Category:Roller derby leagues established in 2008 Category:Roller derby leagues in Washington (state) Category:Roller Derby Coalition of Leagues
&quot;RDCL Founding Members and Mission&quot;, Roller Derby Coalition of Leagues]&quot;, January 1, 2012↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
