Orlando Lamar Pace (born November 4, 1975 in Sandusky, Ohio) is an American football player who currently plays offensive tackle for the St. Louis Rams of the NFL. He was the first overall pick in the 1997 NFL Draft and has been selected to the Pro Bowl seven times.
Biography
High school &amp; college
Pace attended Sandusky High School and played for the Blue Streaks, where he was a two-sport athlete. He averaged 18 points as a center on the Blue Streaks varsity basketball team. He also played football at Sandusky High School where they retired his jersey number, 75, in a ceremony during half time of a game on October 20, 2006. He then played collegiately at the Ohio State University, as only the second true freshman ever to start on opening day for the prestigious Buckeyes football team. He won the Outland Trophy in 1996 for the best college football interior lineman. He was also a two-time winner of the Lombardi Award for the best college lineman or linebacker in 1995 and 1996, and he was a finalist for the 1996 Heisman Trophy and finished fourth in the voting, the highest finish for a lineman (offense or defense) since Hugh Green finished second in 1980. Pace is considered to be the top offensive lineman in the history of college football. Pace actually lined up at defensive tackle during some goal line situations during his junior year at Ohio State.
He was so dominant that the term pancake block - referring to when an offensive lineman knocks a defender on their back - gained popularity at Ohio State due to his play123, although several other college teams have been using the term since the 1980s, most notably Nebraska. In fact, the Ohio State Athletic Department distributed Orlando Pace pancake magnets as a promotion for his Heisman Trophy run. Pace did not allow a sack in his last two years at Ohio State.
NFL career
Orlando Pace was the first offensive lineman in 29 years to be drafted first overall, following Ron Yary (Minnesota) in 1968. He is widely recognized as one of the best tackles in the NFL, especially in pass protection. At 6' 7&quot; tall and 325 pounds, Pace is well-suited for the tackle position. His strength and armspan allow him to be effective in both run- and pass-blocking, but perhaps his greatest asset is his athleticism - Pace's quickness of reflexes and speed are unmatched among NFL offensive linemen.
Pace played 13 games during the 1997 season, his rookie year. He made his first start against the Oakland Raiders on September 20, 1997 and started every single game for the rest of the season.
In the 1999 season Pace played in 896 of 994 offensive plays and was elected to his first Pro Bowl. It was the first time that a Ram offensive tackle was named to the Pro Bowl since Jackie Slater did so in 1990.
Pace has been voted to seven consecutive Pro Bowls dating back to the 1999 season, his third season in the league. Pace's blocking assisted the Rams to a championship win in Super Bowl XXXIV and a championship appearance in Super Bowl XXXVI.
Orlando Pace left in the second quarter against the Seattle Seahawks on November 12, 2006 after he tore his triceps, ending his 2006 Season.
Pace was injured during the Rams' 2007 season opener against the Carolina Panthers on September 9, 2007. He once again tore his triceps. Officials confirmed that Pace would be out for the entire 2007 season, severely jeopardizing the Rams' potent offense for the remainder of the season.
Pace with a torn labrum and rotator cuff has regained 80% of the strength in his shoulder and should be ready for some spring work. Pace is expected to be fully medically cleared by training camp in late July. Pace will take part in post-draft minicamps.
&quot;It feels pretty good,&quot; he said. &quot;When it first started, it was a slow process. But now it's a matter of lifting weights and getting it strong again, getting it back up to where I was.&quot;
4
Personal Life
Pace owns &quot;Big O's Ltd&quot; in his home town of Sandusky, OH. It is a family-friendly sports-bar located on W. Perkins Avenue. Pace likes to make appearances at his restaurant, occasionally signing autographs for his hometown fans. Orlando is also known for being a spokeman for &quot;Our Little Haven &lt;U+201C&gt;Safe &amp; Warm&lt;U+201D&gt; expansion project (1998).&quot; He also donates five tickets to every home game for disadvantaged kids. He currently resides in St. Peters, Missouri.
References
External links
College football career summary from the Ohio State University website
Player profile at NFL.com
fr:Orlando Pace
Category:1975 births Category:American football offensive tackles Category:Big 33 Football Classic alumni Category:Living people Category:National Football League first overall draft picks Category:Ohio State Buckeyes football players Category:People from Sandusky, Ohio Category:St. Louis Rams players Category:National Conference Pro Bowl players
St. Louis Rams Roster: Orlando Pace. The Official Website of the St. Louis Rams. Retrieved 13 September 2006↩
Wagoner, Nick (Sep. 6, 2004). Monday Notebook: Pace Back in Fold The Official Website of the St. Louis Rams. Retrieved 13 September 2006↩
Reynolds , Jeff (May 10, 2006). Cover Boys. ProFootball Weekly. Retrieved 13 September 2006↩
'New type of hunger' fuels Pace↩
