The 2007 United States Air Force nuclear weapons incident occurred at Minot Air Force Base and Barksdale Air Force Base on August 29–30, 2007. Six AGM-129 ACM cruise missiles, each loaded with a W80-1 variable yield nuclear warhead, were mistakenly loaded on a United States Air Force (USAF) B-52H heavy bomber at Minot and transported to Barksdale. The nuclear warheads in the missiles were supposed to have been removed before taking the missiles from their storage bunker. The missiles with the nuclear warheads were not reported missing and remained mounted to the aircraft at both Minot and Barksdale for a period of 36 hours. During this period, the warheads were not protected by the various mandatory security precautions required for nuclear weapons. The incident was reported to the top levels of the United States (U.S.) military as a Bent Spear incident, which indicates a nuclear weapon incident that is of significant concern, but does not involve the immediate threat of nuclear war.
In response to the incident, the U.S. Department of Defense (DoD) and USAF conducted an investigation, the results of which were released on October 19, 2007. The investigation concluded that nuclear weapons handling standards and procedures had not been followed by numerous USAF personnel involved in the incident. As a result, four USAF commanders were relieved of their commands, numerous other USAF personnel were disciplined and/or decertified to perform certain types of sensitive duties, and further cruise missile transport missions from and nuclear weapons operations at Minot Air Force Base were suspended. In addition, the USAF issued new nuclear weapons handling instructions and procedures. Separate investigations by the U.S. Defense Science Board and a USAF &quot;Blue Ribbon&quot; panel reported that concerns existed on the procedures and processes for handling nuclear weapons within the U.S. DoD but did not find any failures with the security of U.S. nuclear weapons.
Background
Minot Air Force Base is the home of the 5th Bomb Wing and Barksdale Air Force Base the home of 2nd Bomb Wing, both of which fall under the 8th Air Force, also based at Barksdale. The 8th is part of Air Combat Command (ACC) in the USAF. In August 2007 the 5th Bomb Wing was commanded by Colonel Bruce Emig, the 2nd Bomb Wing by Colonel Robert Wheeler, the 8th Air Force by Lieutenant General Robert Elder Jr., and ACC by General Ronald Keys.1 The 5th Bomb Wing, according to the USAF's statement on the wing's mission, serves with its B-52 bombers as part of the USAF's conventional and strategic combat force.2 The &quot;strategic&quot; portion of the 5th's mission includes the ability to deliver nuclear weapons against potential targets worldwide. Thus, Minot Air Force Base stores and maintains a ready arsenal of nuclear bombs, nuclear warheads, and associated delivery systems, including, as of August 2007, the AGM-129 Advanced Cruise Missile.3
The AGM-129 was fielded in 1987 as a stealthy cruise missile platform to deliver the W80-3 variable yield nuclear warhead. Although originally designed to equip the B-1 bomber, it was later decided that the AGM-129 would only be carried by the B-52, mounted on external pylons on the wings.4
In March 2007, the USAF decided to retire its AGM-129 complement in order to help comply with international arms-control treaties and to replace them with AGM-86 missiles.5 In order to do so, the USAF began to transport its AGM-129s stored at Minot by B-52s to Barksdale Air Force Base in Louisiana for ultimate disposal. By August 29, 2007 according to the Washington Post, more than 200 AGM-129s had been shipped from Minot to Barksdale in this manner.6
Incident
Between 08:00 and 09:00 (local time) on August 29, 2007 a group of USAF airmen, called the breakout crew, entered one of the weapons storage bunkers at Minot to prepare AGM-129 missiles for transport to Barksdale. That day's missile transport, the sixth of 12 scheduled ferry missions, was to have consisted of 12 AGM-129s, installed with training warheads, with six missiles per pylon and one pylon mounted under each wing of a Barksdale-assigned, 2nd Bomb Wing B-52 aircraft. When the airmen entered the bunker, the missiles were already installed on the underwing pylons and the nuclear warheads in the missiles were supposed to have been already replaced with the dummy training warheads. In this case, however, six of the missiles still carried nuclear warheads. A later investigation found that the reason for the error was that the formal electronic scheduling system for tracking the missiles &quot;had been subverted in favor of an informal process that did not identify this pylon as prepared for the flight.&quot;7 The airmen assigned to handle the missiles used an outdated paper schedule that contained incorrect information on the status of the missiles. The missiles originally scheduled for movement had been replaced by missiles closer to expiration dates for limited life components. The change in missiles had been reflected on the movement plan but not in the documents used for internal work coordination processes in the bunker.8
Although the breakout crew in the weapons storage began to inspect the missiles, an early-arriving transport crew hooked-up the pylons and towed them away without inspecting or ensuring that the missiles had been inspected or cleared for removal. The munitions control center failed to verify that the pylon had received proper clearance and inspection and approved the pylon for loading on the B-52 aircraft at 09:25. The munitions loading crew at the aircraft then failed to inspect the missiles to ensure that they all contained dummy warheads, done by looking through a small glass porthole on the missiles, before loading them on the aircraft. After taking eight hours to attach the pylons to the aircraft, the aircraft with the missiles loaded then remained parked overnight at Minot for 15 hours without special guard as required for nuclear weapons.9
On the morning of August 30, one of the transport aircraft's flight officers, a Barksdale-assigned B-52 instructor radar navigator (name unknown), only closely inspected the six missiles on the right wing, which were all properly uploaded with training warheads, before signing the manifest listing the cargo as a dozen unarmed AGM-129 missiles. The B-52 command pilot did not do a final verification check before preparing to depart Minot.10
The B-52 departed Minot at 08:40 and landed at Barksdale at 11:23 (local times) on August 30. The aircraft remained parked and without special guard until 20:30, when a munitions team arrived to remove the missiles. After a member of the munitions crew noticed something unusual about some of the missiles, at 22:00 a &quot;skeptical&quot; supervisor finally determined that nuclear warheads were present and ordered them secured and the incident reported, 36 hours after the missiles were removed from the bunker at Minot.11
The incident was reported to the National Military Command Center as a Bent Spear incident, which indicates a nuclear weapon incident that is of significant concern, but does not involve the immediate threat of nuclear war (Pinnacle - Nucflash) or the accidental detonation of or severe damage to a nuclear weapon (Pinnacle - Broken Arrow). The incident would also not qualify as a Pinnacle - Empty Quiver incident, since the weapons were not technically &quot;lost&quot; at any point, having never left US Air Force custody. Chief of Staff of the United States Air Force, General T. Michael Moseley quickly called the U.S. Secretary of Defense, Robert Gates, on August 31 to inform him about the incident. Gates requested daily updates regarding the investigation and informed President Bush about the incident.12 The incident was the first of its kind in 40 years in the United States and was later described by the media as &quot;one of the worst breaches in U.S. nuclear weapons security in decades&quot;.13
Response by the U.S. government
The USAF and DoD at first decided to conceal the incident, in part because of the USAF policy not to comment on the storage or movement of nuclear weapons and an apparent belief that the incident would not generate much public concern. In fact, the DoD Bent Spear incident report contained the passage, &quot;No press interest anticipated.&quot; Details of the incident, however, were leaked by unknown DoD officials to the Military Times newspaper, which published a small article on the incident on September 5 2007.14
In response, in a September 5 news briefing in the Pentagon by Press Secretary Geoff Morrell, it was stated that at no time was the public in any danger and that military personnel had custody of the weapons at all times. The USAF announced that within days of the incident, the USAF relieved the Minot munitions squadron commander and eventually disciplined 25 airmen. USAF Major General Doug Raaberg was assigned by General Keys to lead an investigation into the incident. The USAF inventory of nuclear warheads was checked to ensure that all warheads were accounted for. In addition, the DoD announced that a Pentagon-appointed scientific advisory panel, called the Defense Science Board, would study the mishap as part of a larger review of procedures for handling nuclear weapons. On September 28, the USAF announced that General Keys was retiring and would be replaced as ACC commander by General John Corley, effective October 2.15
 On October 19, 2007, U.S. Secretary of the Air Force Michael Wynne and USAF Major General Richard Newton, deputy chief of staff for operations, plans, and requirements, announced the investigation report findings, stating that, &quot;there has been an erosion of adherence to weapons-handling standards at Minot Air Force Base and at Barksdale Air Force Base&quot; and that &quot;... a limited number of airmen at both locations failed to follow procedures.&quot;16 Emig, Colonel Cynthia Lundell, the commander of the 5th Maintenance Group at Minot, and Colonel Todd Westhauser, the commander of Barksdale's 2nd Operations Group, and four senior non-commissioned officers from the 5th Munitions Squadron &quot;received administrative action&quot; and were relieved of their commands or positions and reassigned. All of the 5th Bomb Wing personnel were stripped of their certifications to handle nuclear and other sensitive weaponry and to conduct &quot;specific missions&quot;. Sixty-five airmen of varying ranks lost their personnel reliability program certifications.17 Tactical ferry operations were suspended. The inspector general offices of all USAF major commands that handle nuclear weapons were directed to conduct immediate &quot;Limited Nuclear Surety Inspections (LNSIs) at every nuclear-capable unit&quot; with oversight provided by the Defense Threat Reduction Agency.18
The new ACC commander, General Corley, referred the matter to USAF Lieutenant General Norman Seip, commander of the 12th Air Force, as a court-martial convening authority to determine if additional charges or actions would be taken against any of the personnel involved in the incident. Seip later closed the investigation without recommending criminal charges against anyone involved.19 Retired USAF General Larry Welch was asked by Gates, who had reportedly raised concerns with USAF officials that the original investigation may have unfairly limited blame to midlevel officers, to lead the Defense Science Board advisory panel that would study the mishap as part of a larger review of procedures and policies for handling nuclear weapons. In addition, the USAF chartered a &quot;Blue Ribbon Review&quot; chaired by USAF Major General Polly Peyer and consisting of 30 members to &quot;make recommendations as to how we can improve the Air Force's capability to safely and securely perform our nuclear weapons responsibility&quot;.20 Furthermore, the U.S. Congress requested that the DoD and U.S. Department of Energy conduct a bottom-up review of nuclear procedures.21
Aftermath
On October 24, 2007 Wynne told the House Armed Services Committee that he believed that the 5th Bomb Wing could be recertified and could resume ferrying the AGM-129 cruise missiles to Barksdale for retirement. He did not provide a timeline for that recertification process. On November 1, 2007 Colonel Joel Westa took command of the 5th Bomb Wing.22 That same day, General Keys retired from the Air Force.23
Personnel from Barksdale's 2nd Bomb Wing temporarily took over maintenance duties of Minot's nuclear stockpile until the 5th Bomb Wing could be recertified. A nuclear surety inspection, required for recertification, originally scheduled for the 5th Bomb Wing for January 23, 2008 was postponed indefinitely after an initial inspection that took place on December 16, 2007.24
The USAF issued a new policy directive regarding the handling of nuclear weapons and delivery systems, which prohibits the storing of nuclear armed and nonnuclear armed weapons in the same storage facility. The directive further instructs that all nonnuclear munitions and missiles must be labeled with placards clearly stating that they are not armed with nuclear warheads. Wing commanders are now charged with approving any movement of nuclear weapons from weapons storage areas and must appoint a single individual as a munitions accountability system officer and weapons custodian. All units that handle nuclear weapons must develop a coordinated visual inspection checklist. The policy further directs that airmen charged with handling or maintaining nuclear weapons cannot be on duty for longer than 12 hours, unless during an emergency, when their duty period can be extended to a maximum of 16 hours.25
Welch and Peyer briefed the results of their reviews before the U.S. Senate Committee on Armed Services on February 12, 2008. In addition to Welch and Peyer, Lieutenant General Daniel Darnell, USAF deputy chief of staff for air, space and information operations and Major General Raaberg testified and answered questions from the senate committee's members. During the hearing, Welch stated that, &quot;The military units responsible for handling the bombs are not properly inspected and, as a result, may not be ready to perform their missions.&quot; He added, &quot;If you look at all the areas and all the ways that we have to store and handle these weapons in order to perform the mission, it just requires, we believe, more resources and more attention than they're getting.&quot;26 Welch's report concluded that the combining of DoD nuclear forces with nonnuclear organizations has led to &quot;markedly reduced levels of leadership whose daily focus is the nuclear enterprise and a general devaluation of the nuclear mission and those who perform the mission.&quot; Nevertheless, neither Welch's nor Peyer's reports found any failures with the security of U.S. nuclear weapons.27
Responding to Welch's and Peyer's reports, USAF officials stated that they were already implementing many of the recommendations contained in the reports but added that existing regulations governing nuclear procedures were satisfactory. During his testimony before the senate committee, Darnell stated, &quot;The Air Force portion of the nuclear deterrent is sound, and we will take every measure necessary to provide safe, secure, reliable nuclear surety to the American public.&quot;28
Notes
References
Further reading
Category:Military nuclear incidents Category:Nuclear command and control Category:United States Air Force accidents and incidents Category:Nuclear weapons of the United States Category:United States Department of Defense United States Air Force nuclear weapons incident
Ricks, &quot;Tough Punishment Expected for Warhead Errors&quot;, Baker, &quot;Air Force Relieves Commanders Involved in Nuclear Weapons Incident,&quot; Air Force Link, &quot;General Ronald E. Keys&quot;.↩
USAF, Minot Air Force Base 5th Bomb Wing Mission↩
Warrick, Missteps in the Bunker.↩
Parsch, Andreas, AGM-129↩
, Pincus, &quot;4 Colonels Lose Their Air Force Commands,&quot; USDoD, &quot;DoD Press Briefing with Maj. Gen. Newton&quot;↩
Parsch, Andreas, AGM-129, Warrick, Missteps in the Bunker.↩
USDoD, &quot;DoD Press Briefing with Maj. Gen. Newton&quot;, Hoffman↩
Warrick, &quot;Missteps in the Bunker&quot;, USDoD, &quot;DoD Press Briefing with Maj. Gen. Newton&quot;, Hoffman, &quot;Wing decertified, COs sacked for nuke mistake&quot;, Pincus, &quot;4 Colonels Lose Their Air Force Commands&quot;, Defense Science Board, &quot;Report on Unauthorized Movement of Nuclear Weapons&quot;.↩
Pincus, &quot;4 Colonels Lose Their Air Force Commands&quot;, Hoffman, &quot;Wing decertified, COs sacked for nuke mistake&quot;, Warrick, &quot;Missteps in the Bunker&quot;, USDoD, &quot;DoD Press Briefing with Maj. Gen. Newton&quot;, Defense Science Board, &quot;Report on Unauthorized Movement of Nuclear Weapons&quot;.↩
Warrick, &quot;Missteps in the Bunker&quot;, Hoffman, &quot;Wing decertified, COs sacked for nuke mistake&quot;, USDoD, &quot;DoD Press Briefing with Maj. Gen. Newton&quot;, Pincus, &quot;4 Colonels Lose Their Air Force Commands&quot;.↩
Warrick, &quot;Missteps in the Bunker&quot;, USDoD, &quot;DoD Press Briefing with Maj. Gen. Newton&quot;, Hoffman, &quot;Wing decertified, COs sacked for nuke mistake&quot;.↩
Gilmore, &quot; Air Force Investigates Alleged Nuke Transfer, Pentagon Spokesman Says&quot;.↩
Ricks, &quot;Tough Punishment Expected for Warhead Errors&quot;, Warrick, &quot;Missteps in the Bunker&quot;↩
Warrick, &quot;Missteps in the Bunker&quot;↩
Dorfner, &quot;After four decades, General Keys calls it a career&quot;, Gilmore, &quot;Air Force Investigates Alleged Nuke Transfer, Pentagon Spokesman Says,&quot; Randolph, &quot;Air Force releases B-52 munitions transfer investigation results&quot;, Warrick, &quot;Missteps in the Bunker&quot;, USDoD, &quot;DoD Press Briefing with Maj. Gen. Newton&quot;, USAF, &quot;General Corley takes command of ACC&quot;, Hoffman, &quot;Generals grilled on Minot nuclear mishap&quot;.↩
USDoD, &quot;DoD Press Briefing with Maj. Gen. Newton&quot;.↩
Holmes, &quot;Minot bomb wing gets new commander Thursday&quot;, Hoffman, Michael, &quot;Minot Nuke Handlers Still Not Ready For Inspection&quot;, Military Times, January 14, 2008.↩
Randolph, &quot;Air Force releases B-52 munitions transfer investigation results&quot;, Hoffman, &quot;Wing decertified, COs sacked for nuke mistake&quot;, &quot;Baker, &quot;Air Force Relieves Commanders Involved in Nuclear Weapons Incident,&quot; USDoD, &quot;DoD Press Briefing with Maj. Gen. Newton&quot;, Pincus, &quot;4 Colonels Lose Their Air Force Commands&quot;, Randolph, &quot;Air Force releases B-52 munitions transfer investigation results&quot;.↩
Starr, &quot;Air Force officers relieved of duty over loose nukes&quot;, USDoD, &quot;DoD Press Briefing with Maj. Gen. Newton, Hoffman, Michael, &quot;Minot Nuke Handlers Still Not Ready For Inspection&quot;, Military Times, January 14, 2008.↩
USDoD, &quot;DoD Press Briefing with Maj. Gen. Newton&quot;, Hoffman, &quot;237 nuke handling deficiencies cited since 2001&quot;.↩
Pincus, &quot;4 Colonels Lose Their Air Force Commands&quot;, USDoD, &quot;DoD Press Briefing with Maj. Gen. Newton&quot;, Baker, &quot;Air Force Relieves Commanders Involved in Nuclear Weapons Incident&quot;, Hoffman, &quot;Wing decertified, COs sacked for nuke mistake&quot;, Hoffman, &quot;Generals grilled on Minot nuclear mishap&quot;, Spiegel, &quot;U.S. Nuclear Focus Has Dimmed, Studies Find&quot;.↩
Holmes, &quot;Minot bomb wing gets new commander Thursday&quot;↩
Air Force Link, &quot;General Ronald E. Keys&quot;.↩
Hoffman, Michael, &quot;Minot Nuke Handlers Still Not Ready For Inspection&quot;, Military Times, January 14, 2008, MacPherson, &quot;Minot chief sets bar high after nuke gaffe&quot;.↩
Pincus, &quot;Air Force Alters Rules for Handling of Nuclear Arms&quot;], Hoffman, &quot;New nuke-handling procedures issued&quot;.↩
Spiegel, &quot;U.S. Nuclear Focus Has Dimmed, Studies Find&quot;.↩
Spiegel, &quot;U.S. Nuclear Focus Has Dimmed, Studies Find&quot;, Hoffman, &quot;Generals grilled on Minot nuclear mishap&quot;, Defense Science Board, &quot;Report on Unauthorized Movement of Nuclear Weapons&quot;.↩
Spiegel, &quot;U.S. Nuclear Focus Has Dimmed, Studies Find&quot;, Defense Science Board, &quot;Report on Unauthorized Movement of Nuclear Weapons&quot;.↩
