The goblin shark (Mitsukurina owstoni) is a rare, poorly known species of deep-sea shark. Sometimes called a &quot;living fossil&quot;, it is the only extant representative of the family Mitsukurinidae, a lineage some 125 million years old. This species looks unlike any other shark, with a long flattened snout, highly protrusible jaws containing prominent nail-like teeth, and pink coloration. It is usually between three and four meters (10&lt;U+2013&gt;13 ft) long when mature, though can grow considerably larger. Goblin sharks inhabit upper continental slopes, submarine canyons, and seamounts around the world at depths greater than , with adults found deeper than juveniles.
Various anatomical features of the goblin shark, such as its flabby body and small fins, suggest that it is sluggish in nature. This species hunts for teleost fishes, cephalopods, and crustaceans both near the sea floor and in the middle of the water column. Its long snout is covered with ampullae of Lorenzini that enable it to sense minute electric fields produced by nearby prey, which it can snatch up by rapidly extending its jaws. Small numbers of goblin sharks are unintentionally caught by deepwater fisheries. The International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) has assessed it as Least Concern, citing its wide distribution and low incidence of capture.
Taxonomy
 American ichthyologist David Starr Jordan described the goblin shark in an 1898 issue of Proceedings of the California Academy of Sciences, recognizing the peculiar fish not only as a new species but also a new genus and family. He based his account on an immature male  long caught in Sagami Bay near Yokohama, Japan. The specimen had been acquired by shipmaster and naturalist Alan Owston, who had given it to Professor Kachiki Mitsukuri at the University of Tokyo, who in turn had brought it to Jordan. Thus, Jordan named the shark Mitsukurina owstoni in honor of these two men.1 The common name &quot;goblin shark&quot; is a translation of its old Japanese name tenguzame, a tengu being a Japanese mythical creature often depicted with a long nose and red face.2 Another name for this species is &quot;elfin shark&quot;.3
Shortly after Jordan's description was published, several scientists noted the similarity between Mitsukurina and the extinct Mesozoic shark Scapanorhynchus.4 For a time, the prevailing view was to treat Mitsukurina as a junior synonym of Scapanorhynchus. Eventually, more complete fossils revealed many anatomical differences between Scapanorhynchus and Mitsukurina, leading modern authors to again regard them as distinct genera.5 Several goblin shark specimens were described as separate species from 1904 to 1937, none of which are now considered valid. This taxonomic confusion arose because the specimens' jaws were fixed at varying degrees of protrusion during preservation, giving the appearance of proportional differences in the head.6
Phylogeny and evolution
Phylogenetic studies based on morphology have generally placed the goblin shark as the most basal member of the order Lamniformes, known as mackerel sharks.78 Studies using genetic data have also supported a basal position for this species.910 The family Mitsukurinidae, represented by Mitsukurina, Scapanorhynchus, and Anomotodon, dates back to the Aptian age of the Cretaceous period (c. 125&lt;U+2013&gt;113 Ma). Mitsukurina itself first appears in the fossil record during the Middle Eocene (c. 49&lt;U+2013&gt;37 Ma);1112 extinct species include M. lineata and M. maslinensis.1314 Striatolamia macrota, which lived in warm shallow waters during the Paleogene (c. 66&lt;U+2013&gt;23 Ma), may also be a Mitsukurina species.15 As the last member of an ancient lineage, and one that retains several &quot;primitive&quot; traits, the goblin shark has been described as a &quot;living fossil&quot;.16
Description
thumb|upright=1.2|left|Early illustration of a goblin shark; this species is usually depicted in art and photographs with its jaws extended, which in life only happens during feeding. The goblin shark has a distinctively long and flattened snout, resembling a sword blade. The proportional length of the snout decreases with age.17 The eyes are small and do not have protective nictitating membranes; behind the eyes are spiracles. The large mouth is parabolic in shape. The jaws are highly protrusible and can be extended almost to the end of the snout, though normally they are held flush against the underside of the head. There are 35&lt;U+2013&gt;53 upper and 31&lt;U+2013&gt;62 lower tooth rows. The teeth in the main part of the jaws are long and narrow, particularly those near the sympysis (jaw midpoint), and are finely grooved lengthwise. The rear teeth near the corners of the jaw are small and have a flattened shape for crushing. There is much among-individual variation in tooth length and width, in whether the teeth have a smaller cusplet on each side of the main cusp, and in the presence of toothless gaps at the symphysis or between the main and rear teeth. The five pairs of gill slits are short, with the gill filaments inside partly exposed; the fifth pair is above the origin of the pectoral fins.181920
The body is fairly slender and flabby. The two dorsal fins are similar in size and shape, both being small and rounded. The pectoral fins are also rather small and rounded. The pelvic and anal fins have long bases and are larger than the dorsal fins. The caudal peduncle is flattened from side-to-side and lacks keels or notches. The asymmetric caudal fin has a long upper lobe with a shallow ventral notch near the tip, and an indistinct lower lobe.2122 The soft, semi-translucent skin has a rough texture from a covering of dermal denticles, each shaped like a short upright spine with lengthwise ridges. In life, this species is pink or tan due to visible blood vessels beneath the skin; the color deepens with age, and young sharks may be almost white. The fins' margins are translucent gray or blue, and the eyes are black with bluish streaks in the iris. After death, the coloration quickly fades to dull gray or brown.2324 Adult sharks usually measure between three and four meters (10&lt;U+2013&gt;13 ft) long.25 However, the capture of an enormous female estimated at  long in 2000 showed that this species can grow far larger than previously suspected.26 The maximum weight on record is  for a  long shark.27
Distribution and habitat
The goblin shark has been caught in all three major oceans, indicating a wide global distribution. In the Atlantic Ocean, it has been recorded from the northern Gulf of Mexico, Suriname, French Guiana, and southern Brazil in the west, and France, Portugal, Madeira, and Senegal in the east.282930 It has also been collected from seamounts along the Mid-Atlantic Ridge.3132 In the Indo-Pacific and Oceania, it has been found off South Africa, Mozambique, Japan, Taiwan, Australia, and New Zealand. There is a single known eastern Pacific specimen, collected off southern California.3334 This species is most often found over the upper continental slope at depths of .35 It has been caught as deep as , and a tooth has been found lodged in an undersea cable at a depth of .36 Adults inhabit greater depths than juveniles. Immature goblin sharks frequent the submarine canyons off southern Japan at depths of , with individuals occasionally wandering into inshore waters as shallow as .3738
Biology and ecology
Although observations of living goblin sharks are scant, its anatomy suggests that it leads an inactive and sluggish lifestyle. Its skeleton is reduced and poorly calcified, the muscle blocks along its sides (myomeres) are weakly developed, and its fins are soft and small. Its long caudal fin, held at a low angle, is also typical of a slow-swimming shark. The long snout appears to have a sensory function, as it bears numerous ampullae of Lorenzini that can detect the weak electric fields produced by other animals. Due to the snout's lack of rigidity, it is unlikely to be used for stirring up prey from the bottom as has been proposed.39 Vision seems to be less important than other senses, considering the relatively small optic tectum in the shark's brain.40 Yet unlike most deep-sea sharks, it can change the size of its pupils and thus probably does use its sight in some situations.41 Goblin sharks may fall prey to the blue shark (Prionace glauca).42 Parasites documented from this species include the copepod Echthrogaleus mitsukurinae,43 and the tapeworms Litobothrium amsichensis and Marsupiobothrium gobelinus.44
Feeding
 The goblin shark feeds mainly on teleost fishes such as rattails and dragonfishes. It also consumes cephalopods and crustaceans, including decapods and isopods. Garbage has been recorded from the stomachs of some specimens.45 Its known prey includes bottom-dwelling species such as the blackbelly rosefish (Helicolenus dactylopterus), and midwater species such as the squid Teuthowenia pellucida and the ostracod Macrocypridina castanea rotunda. Thus, the goblin shark appears to forage for food both near the sea floor and far above it.4647
Since it is not a fast swimmer, the goblin shark may be an ambush predator. Its low-density flesh and large oily liver make it neutrally buoyant, allowing it to drift towards its prey with minimal motions so as to avoid detection.48 Once prey comes into range, the shark's specialized jaws can snap forward at incredible speed to capture it. The protrusion of the jaw is assisted by two pairs of elastic ligaments associated with the mandibular joint. The ligaments are pulled taut when the jaws are in their normal retracted position; as the shark bites, the ligaments release their tension and essentially &quot;catapult&quot; the jaws forward.49 At the same time, the well-developed basihyal (analogous to a tongue) on the floor of the mouth shifts down, expanding the oral cavity and sucking in water and prey.50
Life history
Little is known about goblin shark reproduction, as a pregnant female has yet to be found and studied. It likely shares the reproductive characteristics of other mackerel sharks, which are viviparous with small litter sizes and embryos that grow during gestation by eating undeveloped eggs (oophagy).51 The birth size is probably close to , the length of the smallest known specimen.52 Males mature sexually at around  long, while female maturation size is unknown.53 No data are available on growth and aging.54
Human interactions
Given the depths at which it lives, the goblin shark poses no danger to humans. A few specimens have been collected alive and brought to public aquariums, though they survived only a short time. One was kept at Tokai University and lived for a week, while another was kept at Tokyo Sea Life Park and lived for two days.5556 Its economic significance is minimal; the meat may be dried and salted, while the jaws fetch high prices from collectors.5758 At one time, the Japanese also used it for liver oil and fertilizer.59 This shark is not targeted by any fisheries, but is occasionally found as bycatch in bottom gillnets and trawls, hooked on longlines, or entangled in fishing gear. Most captures are isolated incidents; one of the few areas where it is caught regularly is off southern Japan, where around thirty individuals (mostly juveniles) are taken each year. The black scabbardfish (Aphanops carbo) fishery off Madeira also takes two or three goblin sharks annually. In April 2003, over a hundred goblin sharks were caught off northwestern Taiwan; the cause of the event was unknown, though observers noted that it was preceded by a major earthquake. The species had never been recorded in the area before, nor has it been found in such numbers since.6061 The International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) has listed the goblin shark under Least Concern. In addition to its wide range, most of its population is thought to reside in unfished environments because few adults are caught. Therefore, it is not believed to be threatened by human activity.62
References
External links
&quot;Mitsukurina owstoni, Goblin shark&quot; at FishBase
&quot;Mitsukurina owstoni (Elfin Shark, Goblin Shark)&quot; at IUCN Red List
&quot;Biological Profiles: Goblin Shark&quot; at Florida Museum of Natural History
&quot;Biology of the Goblin Shark&quot; at ReefQuest Centre for Shark Research
Category:Mitsukurinidae Category:Fish of the Atlantic Ocean Category:Fish of the Indian Ocean Category:Fish of the Pacific Ocean Category:Ovoviviparous fish Category:Living fossils Category:Animals described in 1898
