Allen Kelsey Grammer (born February 21 1955) is a six-time Emmy and two-time Golden Globe-winning American actor best known for his two-decade portrayal of psychiatrist Dr. Frasier Crane in the NBC sitcoms Cheers (nine years) and Frasier (eleven years). He was nominated for Emmys for playing his character on three different sitcoms (the third being a guest appearance on Wings). He has also worked as a television producer, director, writer, and a voice artist.
Early life
Grammer was born in Saint Thomas, U.S. Virgin Islands to Sally Cranmer, a singer,1 and Frank Allen Grammer, Jr., a bar owner and musician.2 His parents' marriage ended when he was young; his mother took him to live with her, and he was partly raised in New Jersey by his grandparents, Evangeline Dimmock and Gordon Cranmer. His family life has been plagued by repeated tragedies. In 1968, when Grammer was thirteen, his father, whom he had only seen twice since his parents' divorce, was murdered on the front lawn of his home in the U.S. Virgin Islands;3 in 1975, his sister was raped and murdered after being abducted outside a Red Lobster restaurant in Colorado Springs, Colorado where her boyfriend worked.4 In 1980, his twin half-brothers were killed in a SCUBA diving accident.5 He has sworn to prevent the murderer of his sister from being paroled.6
Career
Stage
After leaving Juilliard, he had a three-year internship with the Old Globe Theater in San Diego in the late 1970s before a stint in 1980 at the Guthrie Theater in Minneapolis, Minnesota. He made his Broadway debut in 1981 as Lennox in Macbeth, taking the lead role when Philip Anglim withdrew after receiving negative reviews. In 1983 he performed on the demo of the Stephen Sondheim-James Lapine production Sunday in the Park with George starring Mandy Patinkin. Also featured on the demo was Christine Baranski who later starred as Mrs. Lovett to his Sweeney in the 1999 LA Reprise! production of Stephen Sondheim's Sweeney Todd, the Demon Barber of Fleet Street. He was then the featured role of Cassio in a Broadway revival of Othello with James Earl Jones and Christopher Plummer.
Television
His television career began in the early 1980s when he portrayed Stephen Smith in the NBC mini-series Kennedy. Grammer came to broader public attention as Dr. Frasier Crane in the TV sitcom Cheers. Grammer's former Juilliard classmate and Broadway co-star Patinkin suggested Grammer to the New York casting director, and he got the job.7 The character became the center of the successful spin off Frasier.
He won a number of Emmys and Golden Globes for his work on Frasier. He was the first American actor ever to be nominated for multiple Emmy awards for portraying the same character on three different television shows (Cheers, Frasier, and Wings). His US$1.6 million per episode salary for Frasier was the highest in the history of American television at the time, and his 20-year run playing Dr. Frasier Crane ties a length set by James Arness in playing Marshall Matt Dillon on Gunsmoke from 1955 to 1975.8 The German Actor Wilfried Klaus played the role of Kommisar Horst Schickl in the ZDF TV series &quot;SOKO 5113&quot;9 from 1978 to 2008.10
Voice work
Grammer's smooth, deep voice makes him popular for voiceover work. He has provided the voice of Sideshow Bob on The Simpsons, winning an Emmy for his work in the episode &quot;The Italian Bob&quot;.11 He has appeared in ten episodes since the show's inception in 1989. He also supplied the voices for &quot;Stinky Pete the Prospector&quot; in Toy Story 2, Vladimir in the Fox animated movie Anastasia, Zozi the Bear in the subsequently-produced prequel Bartok the Magnificent, and the title character in the short-lived animated series Gary the Rat. He also provided the opening speech and piano in The Vandals' song &quot;Phone Machine&quot; from the album Fear of a Punk Planet.He also sang a rewritten version of the &quot;grinch&quot; on an episode of &quot;just shoot me&quot;.
Production work
His production company, Grammnet Productions, produces the CW sitcoms Girlfriends and The Game, as well as being involved in many other projects.
Other work
He returned to series television on Fox's The Sketch Show. Prior to that he guest starred as The Angel of Death on Medium, which he also produces. In film, his recent work includes the role of Dr. Hank McCoy (a.k.a. Beast) in X-Men: The Last Stand and the film adaptation of the George Orwell classic book, Animal Farm. Grammer currently co-stars in the FOX sit-com Back to You with Patricia Heaton.
Awards
Kelsey Grammer has received at least 45 nominations for major awards of which he won on 18 occasions.12 He has received fourteen individual Emmy Award nominations for four different television shows (plus an additional two as part of the Frasier ensemble) and has won on five occasions. At the Golden Globes he has received eight nominations and twice been victorious. He has received two People's Choice Awards and in 1999 his directorial skills were recognised with a nomination for a Directors Guild of America award for directing an episode of Frasier. He received a Saturn Award nomination for Best Supporting Actor for his role in X-Men: The Last Stand. On May 22, 2001 he was presented with a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame.
The following table gives a selection of the awards he has won.
Year
Award
Category
1994
Emmy
Outstanding Lead Actor in a Comedy Series (Frasier)
1995
Emmy
Outstanding Lead Actor in a Comedy Series (Frasier)
1995
American Comedy Award
Funniest Male Performer in a TV Series (Frasier)
1996
Golden Globe
Best Performance by an Actor in a TV-Series, Comedy/Musical (Frasier)
1996
American Comedy Award
Funniest Male Performer in a TV Series (Frasier)
1998
Emmy
Outstanding Lead Actor in a Comedy Series (Frasier)
2001
Golden Globe
Best Performance by an Actor in a TV-Series, Comedy/Musical (Frasier)
2004
Emmy
Outstanding Lead Actor in a Comedy Series (Frasier)
2006
Emmy
Outstanding Voice-Over Performance (The Simpsons)
Personal life
Family
Grammer has been married three times. His first marriage, to dance instructor Doreen Alderman, lasted from 1982 to 1990 and had one daughter, Spencer, an actress on the American soap opera As the World Turns and the ABC Family show Greek. His second marriage, to stripper Leigh-Anne Csuhany in 1992, lasted one year. Grammer says that she was abusive and that, after talk of divorce, she attempted suicide, which resulted in the miscarriage of their child.13
In 1992, Grammer had a daughter, Greer, with hair and makeup stylist Barrie Buckner.14 His engagement to Tammi Alexander broke up due to rape allegations and her leaks to the tabloid press. Since August 1997 Grammer has been married to Camille Donatacci, a former Playboy model. They have a son, Jude Gordon, and a daughter, Mason Olivia, both born via surrogate mother.15 Grammer and Donatacci have homes in Malibu, California, Colorado, and New York, and a holiday home in Maui.
Health
Grammer suffered a mild heart attack on May 31, 2008. He was hospitalized in Hawaii after he had symptoms while paddle boating with his wife, Camille.16 He was released on June 4, 2008 and was listed as resting comfortably at his Hawaiian residence.17
Politics
Grammer is a member of the Republican Party and has expressed an interest in someday running for United States Congress.18
He was a celebrity guest at President George W. Bush's first inauguration, along with Dwayne &quot;The Rock&quot; Johnson and Fred Thompson.
He endorsed Rudy Giuliani for president in 2008, before the candidate pulled out of the election and currently campaigns with Giuliani for John McCain.
Kelsey will star in the upcoming movie Swing Vote, a film whose plot is based in part on the recent tight races for President of the United States, in which the vote is so tight that it comes down to one man's vote to determine the winner.
Trivia
In addition to his other voice-over work, Kelsey's relaxed voice has also been featured in commercials. He was the voice of the original GEICO gecko, a talking reptile created by The Martin Agency in 1999. In the commercial, the gecko pleads for people to stop calling him in error, mistaking gecko for GEICO. Since 2006, Grammer has provided the voice for television commercials advertising the Hyundai Sonata, Hyundai Veracruz, and the Hyundai Azera. He was chosen because his &quot;refined and luxurious voice&quot; would help build the up-and-coming car maker's new image as an affordable luxury automobile.
Kelsey's name is parodied in the award-winning British comedy show &quot;Little Britain&quot; as &quot;Kelsey Grammar School&quot;, a boys secondary school.
Kelsey received a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame in 2001.
Selected film and television work
Kennedy (1983) (TV miniseries), as Stephen Smith
Cheers (1984-1993) (TV series), as Frasier Crane
The Simpsons (1990-present) (TV series), as Sideshow Bob (voice)
Girlfriends (2000-2008) (TV series), Executive Producer
The Game (2006-present) (TV series), as Executive Producer
Frasier (1993-2004) (TV series), as Frasier Crane
Down Periscope (1996), as Commander Dodge
Anastasia (1997), as Vladimir (voice)
The Pentagon Wars (1998) (TV Movie - HBO), as Maj. Gen. Partridge
Animal Farm (1999), as Snowball (voice)
Toy Story 2 (1999), as Stinky Pete (voice)
Benedict Arnold: A Question of Honor (2003) (TV), as George Washington
Mr. St. Nick (2002)(TV), as Nick St. Nicholas (Santa's heir)
The Big Empty (2003), as Agent Banks
Gary the Rat (2003) (TV series), as Gary 'The Rat' Andrews (voice)
Teacher's Pet (2004), as Dr. Ivan Krank (voice)
A Christmas Carol (2004) (TV), as Ebenezer Scrooge
Kelsey Grammer Presents: The Sketch Show (2005), as various characters
The Good Humor Man (2005), as Mr. Skibness
Even Money (2006), as Detective Brunner
Medium (2006), as Angel of Death
X-Men: The Last Stand (2006), Dr. Hank Mccoy / The Beast
Significant Others (2006), as Francis
Back to You (2007-2008), as Chuck Darling
Swing Vote (2008), as President Andrew Boone (film is currently in post-production)
An American Carol (2008) as Scrooge
References
External links
Grammer's official site
ca:Kelsey Grammer da:Kelsey Grammer de:Kelsey Grammer es:Kelsey Grammer fr:Kelsey Grammer it:Kelsey Grammer lv:Kelsijs Gramers nl:Kelsey Grammer ja:&lt;U+30B1&gt;&lt;U+30EB&gt;&lt;U+30B7&gt;&lt;U+30FC&gt;&lt;U+30FB&gt;&lt;U+30B0&gt;&lt;U+30E9&gt;&lt;U+30DE&gt;&lt;U+30FC&gt; pl:Kelsey Grammer pt:Kelsey Grammer ro:Kelsey Grammer sq:Kelsey Grammer sh:Kelsey Grammer fi:Kelsey Grammer sv:Kelsey Grammer tr:Kelsey Grammer
Category:1955 births Category:American film actors Category:American Roman Catholics Category:American television actors Category:American voice actors Category:Best Musical or Comedy Actor Golden Globe (television) winners Category:Emmy Award winners Category:Hollywood Walk of Fame Category:Living people Category:New Jersey actors Category:Juilliard School alumni Category:United States Virgin Islands actors
&quot;Grammer's Lesson&quot; from Smoke magazine↩
&quot;A suitable case for treatment&quot; from Ginny Dougary's blog↩
Murder of Kelsey Grammer's sister↩
Profile — Kelsey Grammar↩
&quot;Kelsey Grammer Vows to Speak for Sister if Killer Pursues Parole&quot; from FOXNews↩
Yahoo Movies: Kelsey Grammer↩
TV Guide: Kelsey Grammar↩
Fernsehlexikon: SOKO 5113↩
Fernsehlexikon: In Rente geschicklt↩
Grammer wins Emmy for Simpsons a July 2006 Reuters article via CNN↩
↩
&quot;A suitable case for treatment&quot; from Ginny Dougary's blog↩
↩
Kelsey Grammer Out of the Hospital↩
Transcript: Twenty Years of 'Frasier' from Fox News↩
