George L. Rider (c. 1891 – August 8, 1979) was an American sports coach and athletics administrator at Miami University in Oxford, Ohio. During his career he served as the head coach of football, basketball, baseball, track and cross country teams. In 1959 Rider served as honorary president of the International Track and Field Coaches Association. He is a charter member of Miami University's Hall of Fame along with coaching legends including Walter Alston, Earl Blaik, Paul Brown, Weeb Ewbank, Ara Parseghian and John Pont.
Coaching career
Track
Rider is best known for his 36 years of coaching track and cross country from 1924 to 1960. His track teams won nine Buckeye Conference titles and 10 consecutive Mid-American Conference championships. Also, his cross country teams captured nine Mid-American Conference Championships. In 1957, Rider was selected to the Helms Athletic Foundation Track and Field Coaches Hall of Fame. Additionally, Miami's track is named in his honor for his contributions to the university athletic department.
Football
Rider became Miami University's head coach for the 1917 and 1918 seasons because George Little was serving in the armed forces during World War I. In his two years he never lost a game and won back to back Ohio Athletic Conference championships. His 1917 football team outscored its opponents 202–0. This team went 6–0–2 with the only blemishes being scoreless ties with both Kentucky and the College of Wooster. Rider's second season was just as successful with his team going 5–0–1. However, games against Kentucky, Wooster, and Wittenberg were canceled due to the flu pandemic. Rider stepped down when George Little returned to Oxford from World War I.
Death
Rider died on August 8, 1979 at the age of 88.1
Head coaching record
Football
References
External links
Miami University Hall of Fame profile
George L. Rider Track
George Rider at College Basketball at Sports-Reference.com
Category:1891 births Category:1979 deaths Category:Hanover Panthers football coaches Category:Miami RedHawks athletic directors Category:Miami RedHawks baseball coaches Category:Miami RedHawks football coaches Category:Miami RedHawks men's basketball coaches Category:Washington University Bears football coaches Category:College track and field coaches in the United States Category:Olivet College alumni Category:Burials at Oxford Cemetery, Oxford, Ohio
↩
