Lumines Live! is a puzzle game based on the original PlayStation Portable game for the Xbox 360. It was released on October 18, 2006 as an Xbox Live Arcade title.
Gameplay
The gameplay in Lumines Live! is very similar to the gameplay in Lumines, Lumines II, and Lumines Plus.
As a block-dropping game, its look and basic gameplay is similar to Columns and Tetris, although the music and visuals are far more important to this game. A 2 x 2 square (an O tetromino) made of four smaller block pieces is dropped into the playing field. The small blocks that comprise the larger blocks will be one of two different colors. The player makes the blocks disappear by rotating their component block orientation and using the D-Pad to form four matching colored blocks into a square. A vertical &quot;timeline&quot; periodically sweeps horizontally across the field and removes such squares. Unmatched blocks pile up, and the game ends when the pile gets too tall. When part of a falling block hits an obstruction, the unobstructed portion of the block will split off and continue to fall.
Lumines Live! is played in different &quot;skins&quot;. Like software interface skins, these change the visual appearance of the board, but they also control the soundtrack. Each skin contains a different song and different sound effects, which are triggered by game events and then integrated into the soundtrack. As in Mizuguchi's earlier game Rez, the separation of soundtrack and sound effects is much less than in most computer and video games. Skins are unlocked by progressing through the different game modes.
Features
The game runs in 720p and supports 5.1 surround sound. It features seven modes of play, built-in multiplayer both offline and online, Achievements, Leaderboards and GamerScore support and online competitive modes.
A new feature in Lumines Live over the original Lumines is the ability to create one's own sequence of skins from the skins that have been unlocked through single play mode. Any number of skins can be used exactly once in this sequence and the sequence can be set to either be a single time through (providing a score-attack mode), or to loop indefinitely (providing an endurance mode).
Pricing
The core game originally cost 1200 Microsoft Points1, and an optional downloadable pack is available that contains 22 extra skins costs 600 Points. The optional pack was originally supposed to be released on October 18, 2006 along with the core game, but due to technical reasons the pack was released the next day on October 19. On October 17, 2007, the price of the core game was permanently reduced to 800 points.
External links
Lumines Live! Xbox.com page
References
Category:2006 video games Lumines Live! Category:Puzzle video games Category:Q Entertainment games Category:Xbox 360 Live Arcade games Category:Xbox 360-only games
IGN: XBLA: The &quot;New&quot; Games↩
