Kim Bendix Petersen (born 14 June, 1956 in Copenhagen),1 better known by his stage name King Diamond, is a Grammy Award nominated Danish heavy metal musician. As a vocalist, he is known for his extensive vocal range, in particular his usage of falsetto. He is the lead vocalist for both Mercyful Fate and the eponymous King Diamond.
Career
Early days
King Diamond's first heavy rock band was called Brainstorm (1974&lt;U+2013&gt;76), with Jeanette Blum (Jean Blue) vocal and bass, Michael Frohn (Mike West) guitar and Jes Jacobsen (Jesse James) drums. King Diamond left Brainstorm and began singing with local Danish hard rock band Black Rose. It was during this time in Black Rose that King Diamond began experimenting with horror themed theatrics as well as shaping a malevolent quasi-Satanic stage persona. In 1980, he left Black Rose and joined the punk-metal band Brats where he met Hank Shermann. Soon after, the two of them were asked to help Michael Denner (also formerly a member of Brats) with his own project Danger Zone. This band included Timi Hansen and the mentioned musicians would join with King Diamond in 1980 to become Mercyful Fate.
Mercyful Fate
Following Mercyful Fate's 1984 release of Don't Break the Oath and the subsequent tour (which saw them play in the U.S. for the first time), King Diamond split ways with Mercyful Fate. With him, he took two of his bandmates (Hansen and Denner) to pursue a solo career under his own name.
Mercyful Fate reunited in 1992 (while King Diamond simultaneously continued his solo career) and recorded five more studio albums. In 2000, King decided to put Mercyful Fate on hold and continue on with his solo career. Though Mercyful Fate continues to remain dormant, the band is still under contract with Metal Blade Records. Also in 1999, King Diamond and Hank Shermann performed the song Mercyful Fate with Metallica live. This performance also has King Diamond without his famous makeup. In recent interviews, King Diamond has stated that Mercyful Fate will record and tour again when the timing is right, saying &quot;It's definitely not finished.&quot;2
King Diamond
In 2001, King Diamond worked out a deal with the band Usurper to sing backup vocals on the song &quot;Necronemesis&quot; in exchange for them shifting their recording schedule around to accommodate the recording of Abigail II: The Revenge. In 2004, King Diamond contributed vocals to &quot;Sweet Dreams&quot;, which was the final track on the album of Dave Grohl's heavy metal side project Probot. In late 2005, King Diamond appeared on the Roadrunner United - The All-Star Sessions album, contributing vocals for his song &quot;In the Fire&quot;, which featured multiple Roadrunner Records musicians (past and present) working together to create individual songs. King Diamond also guested on the Cradle of Filth song &quot;Devil Woman&quot; in late 2005.
In April 2006, King reunited with Mikkey Dee (Mot&lt;U+00F6&gt;rhead drummer) at a sold-out gig at K&lt;U+00E5&gt;ren in Gothenburg, Sweden.3 In 2001 King referred to Dee as &quot;one of the best drummers of all time and that's something that has bothered us since he left.&quot;4
King Diamond released his album Give Me Your Soul... Please, on June 26, 2007. Following the release the band received a Grammy nomination in the &quot;Best Metal Performance&quot; category for the track &quot;Never Ending Hill&quot;.5 He was forced to cancel a United States tour due to a herniated disk, causing severe back pain, which puts him in intense pain almost all of the time.6 He attributes the problem to the long stressful hours spent working on the album.
King Diamond made an appearance at Ozzfest on August 9, 2008 at Frisco, TX alongside Metallica, performing a medley of Mercyful Fate songs previously released on Metallica's Garage Inc. album. Earlier in the day, he also performed a cover of the Pantera song &quot;A New Level&quot; with Vinnie Paul, Scott Ian, Max Cavalera, and Nick Bowcott.
In 2009, King Diamond was revealed to be a playable character for the rhythm game Guitar Hero: Metallica, appearing with Mercyful Fate's song &quot;Evil&quot;. Complete the song on any instrument and any difficulty to unlock him.
On November 29, 2010, King Diamond was taken to the hospital, where they discovered several blockages in his arteries due to his heavy smoking habit. They determined that he had several heart attacks and that he needed triple-bypass surgery. The surgery was performed successfully. On December 11, 2010 it was announced that he was at home recovering. All his musical projects at that time were then placed on hold.7
On December 7, 2011, King Diamond appeared on stage with Metallica at The Fillmore in San Francisco to celebrate Metallica's 30th anniversary.8
In June 2012, King performed his comeback concert, on Sweden Rock Festival.
On Saturday September 8, 2012, King appeared along with Mark Tremonti on VH1 Classic's That Metal Show discussing his surgery and various details about upcoming events.
King Diamond then appeared on Volbeat's 2013 album, Outlaw Gentlemen and Shady Ladies, for guest vocals on the track, &quot;Room 24.&quot; 9
Stage presence
On stage, King Diamond uses a microphone handle consisting of a femur bone and a tibia bone in the shape of a cross. King Diamond had previously used a human skull, called Melissa, on stage. In the mid-1980s Melissa was stolen after a performance in the Netherlands.
King Diamond has changed the design of his make-up often over the years. With Conspiracy, he wore a mesh of black and white line war paint, with some red &quot;blood&quot; made to look like a wound coming out of his forehead. With his album The Puppet Master, he used very little white and mainly had black inverted crosses going up and down his face.
Influences
King Diamond cites Arthur Brown, David Byron, Alice Cooper, Ronnie James Dio, Ian Gillan, Ozzy Osbourne and Robert Plant as his primary influences.10
According to King Diamond's bio in his official website, the first two albums he bought himself were Deep Purple's Fireball and Black Sabbath's Master of Reality.11
Religion
King Diamond follows LaVeyan Satanism, which he does not see as a religion, but a philosophy by which he lived even before reading Anton LaVey's The Satanic Bible.12 Michael Moynihan calls him &quot;one of the only performers of the '80s Satanic Metal who was more than just a poseur using a devilish image for shock value&quot;.13 Diamond has expressed concern that religion has led so many people to kill and destroy each other. He stated that he cannot comprehend why religion has caused so much death and destruction when it is logically impossible to prove the presence or absence of any god. He states that he has reached a point in his life where he has completely given up believing in anything religious.14
Marital status
King Diamond is married to Livia Zita, a Hungarian-born singer who has made appearances as a backup vocalist on the albums The Puppet Master and Give Me Your Soul...Please, as well as during live performances. She is also his business partner, and is currently working with him to compile old footage for two planned DVD releases of King Diamond and Mercyful Fate live performances. She also helped him make remastered editions of the King Diamond albums The Spider's Lullabye, The Graveyard, Voodoo and House of God.15
Legacy
Mercyful Fate has an 11 minute tribute to the band performed by Metallica. It features 5 of their songs. When James Hetfield sings it he does not scream high pitched like King Diamond but in 2008 (and again in 2011, with Hank Shermann, Michael Denner and Timi Hansen16) King Diamond performed Mercyful Fate with Metallica and put the screams in where necessary.
Diamond has been on the covers of many rock and metal magazines and influenced many artists including Metallica's Lars Ulrich,17 Cradle of Filth,18 Cage, 19 and Andy DiGelsomina of the Wagnerian Opera Metal project, Lyraka. 20
Discography
King Diamond discography
Mercyful Fate discography
Awards
2008 - Grammy nomination in the &quot;Best Metal Performance&quot; category for the track &quot;Never Ending Hill&quot;.21
References
External links
King Diamond Coven – Official website
The Turkish Coven
Interviews with King Diamond band members Mikki Dee, Pete Blakk, and Andy LaRocque
Category:1956 births Category:Living people Category:Danish rock singers Category:Danish heavy metal singers Category:Danish male singers Category:Danish atheists Category:Danish Satanists Category:Danish horror writers Category:Mercyful Fate members Category:Musicians from Copenhagen Category:English-language singers of Denmark Category:Danish tenors Category:Singers with a four octave vocal range
G&lt;U+00F6&gt;tz K&lt;U+00FC&gt;hnemund: A History of Horror. In: Rock Hard, no. 282, november 2010, pp. 20-27.↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
King Diamond - Official Website: http://www.covenworldwide.org/bandhistory02.php↩
Michael Moynihan, Didrik S&lt;U+00F8&gt;derlind: Lords of Chaos: The Bloody Rise of the Satanic Metal Underground, Feral House 1998, pp. 15f.↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
Interview with Dani Filth↩
&quot;King Diamond is a big influence because of the music, the story telling and the different voices that are employed.&quot;↩
/quote &quot;The classic metal operas of King Diamond were a huge influence on my writing.&quot;↩
