Michael &quot;Mick&quot; Kevin Taylor (born 17 January, 1949 in Welwyn Garden City, Hertfordshire) is an English musician best known as the former lead guitarist for The Rolling Stones.
Early career
Mick Taylor grew up in Hatfield, Hertfordshire, and began playing guitar at age 9. As a teenager he formed bands with schoolmates and they soon began to do gigs under the name The Juniors (or the Strangers). They even appeared on television and put out a single. Part of the band was recruited for a new group called The Gods which included Ken Hensley (later of Uriah Heep fame). In 1966 The Gods opened for Cream at the Starlite Ballroom in Wembley. When Taylor was 16 years old (1965) he had come to see a John Mayall's Bluesbreakers college gig in Hatfield with some of his mates from his band. Eric Clapton failed to show up for some reason and after Taylor approached Mayall during the intermission, he ended up filling in as the guitarist for the second set, playing Clapton's guitar. Taylor started to become known as a musical prodigy, and was asked to join the Bluesbreakers after Peter Green's resignation. Before he turned 18, Taylor was touring and recording the album Crusade with English blues pioneer John Mayall in John Mayall's Bluesbreakers. From 1966 to 1969 Taylor grew to develop his fluid and emotive guitar style that is blues based, but Latin and Jazz influenced. Taylor is also seen as one of the most prominent slide guitar players.
Rolling as a Stone
When The Rolling Stones wanted to tour North America in 1969, a tour which was to be their first in three years, the problem of founding member and lead guitarist Brian Jones could not be ignored. His conviction for illicit drug usage prevented him from obtaining a work visa status that would have allowed him to perform on tour in America; this and his inability to cope in general had alienated him from the rest of the group, and this would have made touring difficult if not impossible. Jones was fired in early June 1969, and died tragically by drowning on 3 July 1969. Jagger reportedly did not want to hold auditions to replace him, and the process by which Taylor became a Stone was significantly different from the way in which Ronnie Wood would five and a half years later. Jagger simply asked John Mayall from the Bluesbreakers for his advice. Mick Taylor was recommended, and Jagger invited him to a recording session. Taylor arrived at the studio thinking they wanted him to do some session work, but after a while he realized he was in fact being auditioned as a new guitarist for the band. Taylor did overdubs on two tracks, &quot;Country Honk&quot; and &quot;Live With Me&quot; from the 1969 Let It Bleed album. This impressed Richards and Jagger enough to tell him: &quot;See you tomorrow&quot; before he left the studio the first day. Taylor continued rehearsing and recording for the summer of 1969. The Stones were rehearsing Stevie Wonder's I Don't Know Why (I Love You) when Jagger answered the telephone informing the band Jones had drowned.
The electric guitar version of &lt;U+201C&gt;Country Honk&lt;U+201D&gt;, now named &quot;Honky Tonk Women&quot; was inspired by Taylor's country riffs while he was doing overdub takes for the acoustic &quot;Country Honk&quot;, and &quot;Honky Tonk Women&quot; was re-recorded by the Stones with Taylor during his second session. Legend is the recording still features guitar by Brian Jones, and this then would make it the only track with Jones and Taylor both playing. However, as with most legends, it can not be true, and it has always been denied by all members of the Stones. In fact, Jones' last guitar contributions at a Stones session are from June 1968. For most of the 1969 Let it Bleed sessions Jones was not present, and his only contributions are autoharp on Let it Bleed's &quot;You Got the Silver.&quot;
Known as &quot;Little Mick&quot; within the band, Taylor's live presence with the Stones is preserved on the 1970s Get Yer Ya-Yas Out!, a live album recorded over three gigs at the Madison Square Garden in New York, a week before the Altamont tragedy in San Francisco. Sticky Fingers, Exile on Main Street, Goats Head Soup and It's Only Rock and Roll were the four studio albums Taylor recorded with the Stones. Songs like &quot;Sway&quot;, &quot;Can't You Hear Me Knocking&quot;, &quot;Moonlight Mile&quot;, &quot;All Down the Line&quot;, &quot;Shine a Light&quot;, &quot;Stop Breaking Down&quot;, &quot;Hundred Years Ago&quot;, &quot;Winter&quot;, &quot;Time Waits for No One&quot; and &quot;Fingerprint File&quot; are indelibly the Mick Taylor classics from those four studio records. However, to the many fans of the Rolling Stones, the 1972 American Tour and the 1973 European Tour are where the true genius of Mick Taylor and the Taylor years can be heard, and the band was unable (and ever since unwilling) to officially release material recorded on these tours. The band was contractually prohibited from officially releasing any material that was owned by Allen Klein's company ABKCO. It is a tragedy for Taylor fans that his best live work as a Stone can only be heard on obscure sound and film recordings, found on bootlegs of mostly mediocre sound quality although 21st century re-masters of these bootlegs are now becoming more readily available through internet.
Taylor resigned from the Rolling Stones in December 1974, just before the Stones were to start recording a new album in Munich, West Germany. As the story goes, the Stones were at a party in London when Taylor announced he was quitting and walked out. Jagger, took the news professionally, but Richards complained about Taylor's departure. Mick Jagger, in a 1995 interview with Jann Wenner of Rolling Stone magazine, nearly admits the years Taylor was a member of the band were the best musically. Jagger said Taylor never explained why he had left, and surmised that &quot;he (Taylor) wanted to have a solo career. I think he found it difficult to get on with Keith.&quot; Hard feelings dissipated over time: Taylor appears on &quot;I Could Have Stood You Up&quot;, a song from Talk is Cheap, Richards' first solo album. On 14 December 1981, Mick Taylor appeared on stage at the Kemper Arena in Kansas City with the Rolling Stones; and at a Mick Taylor show in NYC (Lone Star Club) on 28 December 1986, Richards appeared on stage with Taylor. They played &quot;Key to the Highway&quot; and &quot;Can't You Hear Me Knocking&quot; which Keith seemed to find quite hard to reproduce. The Rock and Roll Hall of Fame inducted the Stones and Mick Taylor in 1989. 
After the 1969 tour, Jagger and Taylor developed a way of working together when Richards was &quot;missing in action&quot;, mainly due to Richards growing use of drugs and increasing unreliability. Jagger and Taylor wrote and recorded songs like &quot;Sway&quot;, &quot;Moonlight Mile&quot; and &quot;Winter&quot;, but Taylor never received proper credits for his writing. This resulted in Taylor becomming more disgruntled the longer he worked with the band, because it became clear he would always be a junior partner. (Also Richards did get credit for songs that were recorded when he failed to show up at the studio). The only songwriting credit, a Jagger/Richards/Taylor composition was &quot;Ventilator Blues&quot; on Exile, which came about after a jam; it is thought that Taylor songwriting contributions on a number of other Stones songs, including notable ones such as &quot;Moonlight Mile&quot;, went uncredited.
But lack of songwriting credits wasn't the only reason he chose to leave the band. While recording Exile on Main Street in the South of France in 1971 Taylor started to dabble with heroin, and as early as 1972 he talked to people about &quot;escaping the Stones&quot;. Also important is that after the 1973 European tour, the future for the Stones looked dim. Keith Richards was heavily strung out on drugs, and for a while it looked like the Stones would collapse as a band. Taylor got fed up with waiting for the band to move and felt like it was a stalemate situation (the Stones didn't do much touring between Oct '73 and Dec '74). In December '74 Taylor shocked the music world by announcing that he was leaving the band. As he was considered one of the best guitarists in the world, it was expected he could build a solo career as had Eric Clapton.
After Taylor resignation his playing can be heard on 1975&lt;U+2019&gt;s Metamorphosis album, Sucking in the 70's, Made in the Shade as well as many compilation albums. Two songs of 1981's &quot;Tattoo You&quot; also feature Taylor (&quot;Tops&quot; and &quot;Waiting On A Friend&quot;). Taylor is sometimes mistakenly credited as playing on &quot;Worried about You&quot; on Tattoo You, the solo on that song is actually performed by Wayne Perkins.
Solo career
In 1973 Taylor had also been involved with introducing Mike Oldfield's music to the public by performing Tubular Bells live at the Queen Elizabeth Hall in June of that year. Taylor was asked to take part in this project by Richard Branson because Mike Oldfield was the first artist he had signed to his fledgling label Virgin Records but Oldfield was still completely unknown. Mick Jagger came to witness the first live rendition of Tubular Bells and Taylor introduced him to Richard Branson.
After Taylor had left the Stones, Jack Bruce asked him to form a new &quot;supergroup&quot; together with Carla Bley. After rehearsing with the Jack Bruce Band in '75, they toured Europe (including a performance at the Dutch Pinkpop Festival), but the the group was disbanded for various reasons (mostly conflicting egos) before any studio material was recorded. In May 2003, the double CD Live at the Manchester Free Trade Hall (recorded June 1st 1975) gig was released by Polydor after some tapes were found back in someone's attic. This and their performance Live at the Old Grey Whistle Test is the only material available from this line-up which included drummer extraordinaire Bruce Gary (a good friend of Taylor). Bruce Gary passed away in Los Angeles in Aug '06, at the age of 55.
In the mid 1970s there was an extremely unhealthy climate in the music business, which lasted well into the '80s, and as many people around the Rolling Stones this also effected Taylor. For the most part of 1976 to 1979 Taylor was absent from the music scene battling his addictions. His only musical contributions are a guest appearence at a Little Feat concert (released only on vinyl), some sessions with Belgian drummer Pierre Moerlen and his band Gong (Expresso II album) and lent his services to John Phillips for the Pay Pack and Follow album which led to Richards, Wood, Jagger and Taylor working together on some of the tracks.
In 1979, four years after he had left the Stones, Taylor's first solo album was released on CBS, but it couldn't have been released at a worse time. The trend of the day was punk and new wave, while Taylor's album was jazz- and Latin-flavoured blues. It was the height of the punk movement and the record label told Taylor he should promote the record by visiting American radio stations. Taylor, on the other hand, wanted to take a new band on the road, which he saw as the best way to introduce audiences to his own songs, but this plan wasn't backed by the record company. Already frustrated with this situation, Taylor pulled back from the music scene completely until late 1981, when he toured Europe and America with Alvin Lee (from Ten Years After). He spent most of 1982-1983 on the road with his old mentor John Mayall for the so-called Reunion Tour with John McVie (Fleetwood Mac) and Colin Allen. It was during this tour that Bob Dylan showed up backstage at The Roxy in Los Angeles because he wanted to meet Taylor.
Perhaps Taylor's second most known work came in 1983 with Bob Dylan Infidels album, on which Taylor played with Mark Knopfler as well as Sly Dunbar and Robbie Shakespeare. Taylor lived in New York throughout the decade, which turned out to be a dark period. He battled with addiction problems for part of the decade before getting back on track the second half of the 1980s and moving to Los Angeles in 1990.
At the end of the 1980s and early '90s, Taylor managed to find his way back by doing session work and touring in Europe and America with a band including Max Middleton (formerly of Jeff Beck group), Shayne Fontayne, and Blondie Chaplin (now a back-up musician with the Stones). Taylor moved back to England in the mid 1990s. He never seemed to feel comfortable in his role as a former Rolling Stone until he released a new record in the year 2000, the CD &quot;A Stone's Throw&quot;. Playing at clubs and theatres (impossible for the Stones) as well as appearing at festivals has connected Taylor with an appreciative audience and lasting fanbase.
Rolling Stone discography
Through the Past, Darkly (Big Hits Vol. 2) (1969) (compilation)
Taylor plays on &quot;Honky Tonk Women&quot;
Let It Bleed (1969)
Taylor plays on Country Honk and Live With Me
Get Yer Ya-Yas Out! (1970)
Sticky Fingers (1971)
Hot Rocks, 1964-1971 (1972) (compilation)
Exile on Main St. (1972)
Goats Head Soup (1973)
It's Only Rock'n Roll (1974)
Made in the Shade (1975) (compilation of hits 1971-1974)
Metamorphosis (1975)
Taylor plays on &quot;I Don't Know Why&quot;, &quot;Jiving Sister Fanny&quot; and &quot;I'm Going Down&quot;.
Sucking in the Seventies (1981) (compilation of hits, album cuts and outtakes 1974-1981)
Tattoo You (1981)
Taylor plays on &quot;Tops&quot; as well as &quot;Waiting on a Friend&quot; both tracks recorded in 1973 during the Goats Head Soup sesions.
Rewind (1971-1984) (1984) (compilation of hits 1971-1983)
Singles Collection: The London Years. (1989) (compilation of singles 1963-1971)
Jump Back: The Best of The Rolling Stones (1993) (compilation of hits 1971-1989)
Forty Licks (2002) (compilation 1964-2002)
Rarities 1971-2003 (2005)
Taylor plays on Let It Rock (live 1971) and the 1974 b-side Through The Lonely Nights.
Non-Rolling Stones work with Rolling Stones members:
Pay, Pack &amp; Follow (John Phillips album produced by Mick Jagger and Keith Richards) (2001 release, from 1970s recording sessions in London)
I've Got My Own Album To Do (Ronnie Wood solo album) (1974)
&quot;Now Look&quot; (Ronnie Wood solo album) (July 1975)
Talk Is Cheap (Keith Richards solo album) (1988)
Notable work with Bob Dylan
Infidels (1983)
Real Live (In Europe, 1984) (1984)
Empire Burlesque (1985)
The Bootleg Series Vol 1-3 - Rare &amp; Unreleased 1961 -1991 (1997)
Solo discography
Mick Taylor (album) (1979) US #119
Stranger in This Town (1990)
Too Hot for Snakes (1991) (Carla Olson &amp; Mick Taylor)
A Stone's Throw (2000)
Coastin' Home aka Live at the 14 Below (2003)
Albums with Carla Olson
Too Hot For Snakes aka ''Live at the Roxy (1991 live album)
Within An Ace (1993)
Reap The Whirlwind
''Special - The best of Carla Olson (1995, Virgin Records)
The Ring of Truth (2001)
Other session work
''Tubular Bells Premiere (Mike Oldfield) June '73 Queen Elizabeth Hall
''Tubular Bells (Mike Oldfield) Telecast Tubular Bells Part One and Tubular Bells Part Two. Recorded at BBC Broadcasting House Nov '73 and aired in early '74 and June '74
Note: recently repeated on BBC and included in Mike Oldfield DVD
The Tin Man Was A Dreamer (Nicky Hopkins) (1973)
''Waiting For Columbus (double LP) Little Feat (1978)
Expresso II ( Gong) (1978)
Shadow Man (Enhanced re-release) (2003)
This album has wrongly been marketed as a Mick Taylor solo album. It is in fact a Sacha album. Taylor was only hired as a guitarist and would not have chosen to put this album out under his own name.
External links
Mick Taylor Fan Club web site
Time waits for No One. Another good fan site.
ca:Mick Taylor de:Mick Taylor es:Mick Taylor fr:Mick Taylor he:&lt;U+05DE&gt;&lt;U+05D9&gt;&lt;U+05E7&gt; &lt;U+05D8&gt;&lt;U+05D9&gt;&lt;U+05D9&gt;&lt;U+05DC&gt;&lt;U+05D5&gt;&lt;U+05E8&gt;] hu:Mick Taylor nl:Mick Taylor ja:&lt;U+30DF&gt;&lt;U+30C3&gt;&lt;U+30AF&gt;&lt;U+30FB&gt;&lt;U+30C6&gt;&lt;U+30A4&gt;&lt;U+30E9&gt;&lt;U+30FC&gt; no:Mick Taylor pt:Mick Taylor fi:Mick Taylor sv:Mick Taylor
Taylor, Mick Taylor, Mick Taylor, Mick Taylor, Mick Taylor, Mick Taylor, Mick Taylor, Mick Taylor, Mick Taylor, Mick Taylor, Mick
