Doe v. Bolton, 410 U.S. 179 (1973), was a landmark decision of the United States Supreme Court overturning the abortion law of Georgia. The Supreme Court's decision was released on January 22, 1973, the same day as the decision in the better-known case of Roe v. Wade, 410 U.S. 113 (1973).
History of case during the 1970s
The Georgia law in question permitted abortion only in cases of rape, severe fetal deformity, or the possibility of severe or fatal injury to the mother. Other restrictions included the requirement that the procedure be approved in writing by three physicians and by a special committee of the staff of the hospital where the abortion was to be performed. In addition, only Georgia residents could receive abortions under this statutory scheme: non-residents could not have an abortion in Georgia under any circumstances.
The plaintiff, a pregnant woman who was given the pseudonym &quot;Mary Doe&quot; in court papers to protect her identity, sued Arthur K. Bolton, then the Attorney General of Georgia, as the official responsible for enforcing the law. The anonymous plaintiff has since been identified as Sandra Cano, a 22-year-old mother of three who was nine weeks pregnant at the time the lawsuit was filed. Cano describes herself as pro-life and claims her attorney, Margie Pitts Hames, lied to her in order to have a plaintiff. 1
A three-judge panel of the United States district court declared the conditional restrictions portion of the law unconstitutional, but upheld the medical approval and residency requirements, and refused to issue an injunction against enforcement of the law. The plaintiff appealed to the Supreme Court under a statute, since repealed, permitting bypass of the circuit appeals court.
The oral arguments and re-arguments followed the same schedule as those in Roe. Atlanta attorney Hames represented Doe at the hearings, while Georgia assistant attorney general Dorothy Toth Beasley represented Bolton.
The same 7-2 majority (Justices White and Rehnquist dissenting) that struck down a Texas abortion law in Roe v. Wade, invalidated most of the remaining restrictions of the Georgia abortion law, including the medical approval and residency requirements. Together, Doe and Roe declared abortion as a constitutional right and by implication overturned most laws against abortion in other US states.
Broad definition of health
The Court's opinion in Doe v. Bolton stated that a woman may obtain an abortion after viability, if necessary to protect her health. The Court defined health as follows:
Litigation 30 years later
In 2003, Sandra Cano filed a motion to re-open the case claiming that she had not been aware that the case had been filed on her behalf and that if she had known she would not have supported the litigation.2 The district court denied her motion, and she appealed. When the appeals court also denied her motion,3 she requested review by the United States Supreme Court. However, the Supreme Court declined to hear Sandra Cano's suit to overturn the ruling.4
See also
Roe v. Wade
Canadian Supreme Court case of R. v. Morgentaler finding Canada's abortion law unconstitutional
German Federal Constitutional Court abortion decision
List of United States Supreme Court cases, volume 410
References
External links
Text of the decision from Findlaw
Doe v. Bolton, 410 U.S. 179 (1973) from LII-Cornell Law School
United States Senate Committee of the Judiciary Testimony of Sandra Cano
es:Caso Doe contra Bolton hr:Sudski proces Doe protiv Boltona nl:Doe vs. Bolton
Category:United States substantive due process case law Category:United States Fourteenth Amendment case law Category:United States Supreme Court cases Category:United States abortion case law Category:1973 in United States case law
White, Gayle. &quot;Roe v. Wade Role Just a Page in Rocky Life Story&quot;, The Atlanta Journal and Constitution (2003-01-22).↩
&lt;U+201C&gt;'Mary Doe' of Doe v. Bolton Files Motion To Overturn Companion Case to Roe v. Wade&lt;U+201D&gt;, Kaiser Daily Reproductive Health Report, (2003-08-27).↩
Cano v. Baker, 435 F.3d 1337 (11th Cir. 2006).↩
Mears, Bill. &quot;Court won't rethink 'Mary Doe' abortion case&quot;, CNN (2006-10-10).↩
