Ana POUVREAU is an American born political scientist, writer and specialist in International Relations and Strategic studies. Originally a Russia specialist for 15 years, she has worked on other geopolitical areas such as the Balkans and Turkey. She is also an expert on the politics, defence and security issues of France. In recent years, she has been investigating societal issues which she considers critical to the survival of Western civilization. She is the author of several books and is currently writing for Newsweek 1 2 and other publications.
Ana Pouvreau was born 28 September 1967 in New York City. She was later raised in France. After graduating from French lyc&lt;U+00E9&gt;e with a Baccalaur&lt;U+00E9&gt;at diploma (Maths and Physics), she returned to the US for higher education. She obtained a B.A in Political Science and Russian at the State University of New York at Stony Brook in 1988 and a M.A in International Relations and Strategic Studies from Boston University in 1991. She also holds a Master&lt;U+2019&gt;s degree from the University of Paris X-Nanterre in Russian language and civilization and a dipl&lt;U+00F4&gt;me d&lt;U+2019&gt;&lt;U+00E9&gt;tudes approfondies in Slavic studies from the University of Paris IV-Sorbonne.
In 1995, she obtained her PhD from the Sorbonne summa cum laude in Slavic Studies. Her thesis focused on the attempts of moral rejuvenation in post-Soviet Russian society by former dissident Christian anti-Soviet movements. 3 Two of the great intellectual influences on her work are Alexander Solzhenitsyn and Alexander Zinoviev.
Ana Pouvreau speaks English, French, Russian and she has a basic knowledge of Turkish, Spanish and Italian.
Ana Pouvreau has published several books in French:
(Editor and co-author)
Category:1967 births Category:People from New York City Category:Political scandals Category:Living people
French Cheesmakers Crippled by EU Health Measures Newsweek August 26 2014↩
'Torture in a Can': French Foie Gras Farmers Failing to Improve Appalling Conditions Newsweek August 26 2014↩
 (BU : 95PA040215)↩
