Journey of a Red Fridge is a 2007 documentary film about 17-year-old porter Hari Rai working in the Himalayan Mountains of Nepal. It was directed by Lucian and Natasa Muntean (aka Lunam Docs), a Serbian independent documentary production duo specializing in telling the stories of working children. Journey of a Red Fridge was produced in association with The Global Fund for Children.
Synopsis
Journey of a Red Fridge is a story of a 17-year-old boy named Hari Rai, who lives in a small village in the Himalayan Mountains of Nepal, and his extraordinary journey. Hari is a student. However, he also works as a porter so that he could pay for his tuition and cover his living expenses. Although very young, he already has three years of experience carrying loads up and down the mountain, mostly tourists' backpacks. This time, he gets a job to carry a huge red refrigerator from the top of the mountain, to the nearest town.
We follow Hari Rai on his journey through the fascinating Himalayan landscapes, we discover Hari&lt;U+2019&gt;s inner life, his thoughts, hopes and dreams and we also get to know the culture and the local people&lt;U+2019&gt;s way of life in this region. We learn about their relation with the most important aspects of their lives: family, nature and religion.
Out of 60,000 child porters in Nepal, Hari is one of the few lucky ones to have a chance of going to school. Journey of a Red Fridge shows us what it takes for him to get his education.
Alternate titles
Die Reise des roten K&lt;U+00FC&gt;hlschranks (Austria TV title; ORF)
Die Reise des roten K&lt;U+00FC&gt;hlschranks (Germany TV title; ARTE)
Les tribulations d'un frigo rouge (France TV title; ARTE)
Punainen j&lt;U+00E4&gt;&lt;U+00E4&gt;kaappi (Finland TV title; YLE)
Putovanje crvenog fri&lt;U+017E&gt;idera (Serbia TV title)
Exhibition and awards
Journey of a Red Fridge premiered at the 2007  IDFA Film Festival, Amsterdam, the Netherlands. Since then, Journey of a Red Fridge has been screened at more than 60 international festivals and received 20 awards.
Journey of a Red Fridge was released on DVD in March 2009.
References
External links
Journey of a Red Fridge on ARTE
Journey of a Red Fridge on YLE
1
Video
Journey of a Red Fridge - 3 minutes excerpt on Digital Himalaya
Category:2007 films Category:Serbian documentary films Category:2000s documentary films Category:Nepali-language films
