 Vern Ralph Smith (1892-unknown) was an American left wing journalist who served in an editorial capacity for several publications of the Industrial Workers of the World and the Communist Party USA (CPUSA). Smith is best remembered as the Moscow correspondent of the CPUSA's The Daily Worker during the middle-1930s.
Biography
Early years
Verne Ralph Smith was born May 8, 1892, in Alila, California, the son of a dairy farmer. He attended public school in Tulare County and graduated as the valedictorian of his class.1 Smith, one of 4 children, spent his youth working on the family farm in the San Joaquin Valley, leaving for school at the age of 20.2
Smith attended the University of California at Berkeley, from which he graduated in 1916 with a Bachelor's degree in Economics. While at Berkeley, Smith was the secretary of his school's chapter of the Intercollegiate Socialist Society and president fo the California International Cosmopolitan Club.3
During the years of First World War, Smith was a Second Lieutenant of the infantry in the Officers' Reserve, but was never ordered to active duty.4 He worked variously as a farm hand, construction worker, and storekeeper.5
Journalistic career
Smith travelled east, working a job in the Kansas wheat fields. In 1921 he joined the Industrial Workers of the World (IWW) as a member of Agricultural Workers' Industrial Union, No. 110.6 He later followed the harvest to Canada, before heading for Seattle, Washington, where he became editor of the IWW's west coast newspaper, The Industrial Worker.7
Smith joined the local &quot;Marxian Club&quot; in Seattle in 1922 &lt;U+2014&gt; this at a time when the Communist Party of America was a secret (&quot;underground&quot;) organization. Smith later recalled:
&quot;I read Marx's Capital and decided that the Communists probably had the right idea and joined the Marxian Club. This club was a legal group in Seattle under the influence of the underground Communist Parties. I never got into the underground movement, but went with the club into the Workers Party when the club joined the Party in a body immediately after the organization of the Workers Party [in December 1921].&quot;8
When the IWW turned against the Communists in 1922, Smith remained in the union under the direction of the Workers Party in Seattle.9 Smith remained as editor of the paper until June of 1923, at which time the IWW sent him to Chicago to edit the organization's primary English-language newspaper, Industrial Solidarity.10 He was also the assistant manage of the IWW's Educational Bureau in 1924.11
Smith was exposed as a secret member of the Workers (Communist) Party in 1926 and fired from his position as editor of Industrial Solidarity. He was immediately taken onto the staff of the Communist Party's daily newspaper, The Daily Worker, also published in Chicago at the time.12 When the paper moved to New York City in 1927, Smith moved with it, remaining on the staff for the rest of the 1920s and throughout most of the 1930s, save for a 7 month period when he was made editor of Labor Unity, the monthly magazine of the Trade Union Unity League, an affiliate of the Communist Party.13
During the Harlan County, Kentucky mine strikes of the early 1930s, Smith was dispatched to the area as The Daily Worker's correspondent. Smith was arrested along with a number of strike organizers and relief workers and was incarcerated for four months in the Harlan County jail, the last 31 days of which were in solitary confinement.14
In August 1933, Smith was made the Moscow correspondent of The Daily Worker. During his stint there, he wrote two books highly favorable to the Soviet system, one dealing with coal miners in the Donets Basin and the other with workers on a Soviet collective farm.
Smith returned to California after his time in Moscow, as labor editor and foreign editor of the CP's California newspaper, the People's Daily World.15 He also taught in San Francisco at the Tom Mooney Labor School, a Communist Party educational project.
Smith was expelled from the Communist Party in 1946 during the party's crackdown on so-called anti-revisionist left wing factional dissidents.16
Death and legacy
Vern Smith's papers, primarily relating to his time as a member of the IWW, are located at the Kheel Center for Labor-Management Documentation and Archives in the Martin P. Catherwood Library at Cornell University in Ithaca, New York.
Footnotes
Works
Miners in the Donbas. Moscow: Co-operative Publishing Society of Foreign Workers in the USSR, 1935.
In a Collective Farm Village. Moscow: Co-operative Publishing Society of Foreign Workers in the USSR, 1936.
History of the American Labor Movement, 1700-1943. San Francisco: Tom Mooney Labor School, n.d. [c. 1943].
External links
&quot;Guide to the Vern Smith, Collector. Industrial Workers of the World Files, 1916-1935,&quot; Kheel Center for Labor-Management Documentation and Archives, Cornell University. Retrieved February 19, 2010.
Category:1892 births Category:American socialists Category:American Marxists Category:Members of the Industrial Workers of the World Category:Members of the Communist Party USA Category:American newspaper editors
Solon DeLeon with Irma C. Hayssen and Grace Poole, The American Labor Who's Who. New York: Hanford Press, 1925; pg. 216.↩
Sender Garlin, &quot;Vern Smith is New 'Daily' Correspondent in USSR,&quot; The Daily Worker, vol. 10, no. 203 (August 24, 1933), pg. 6.↩
Paul Costello, &quot;Anti-Revisionist Communism in the United States, 1945-1950,&quot; Theoretical Review No. 11, July-August 1979, pps. 10-17.↩
