The Garrick Gaieties is a revue with music by Richard Rodgers and lyrics by Lorenz Hart, first of a long line of musicals by this songwriting team. It was the first of four Garrick Gaiety revues, which were subsquently produced in 1926 and 1930. The show parodied current subjects, such as the New York subway system and the Theatre Guild (producer of the show). The Garrick Gaieties is remembered as &quot;bringing Rodgers and Hart their first major recognition.&quot; Their major hit song &quot;Manhattan&quot; was introduced in this revue.1
Production
The revue first opened on Broadway at the Garrick Theatre on May 17, 1925, as a 2-performance benefit for the Theatre Guild. The reviews were favorable, and Rodgers and others persuaded the Theatre Guild to continue the revue, which re-opened on June 8, 1925 and ran until November 28, for 211 performances.2 Several writers contributed the material for the sketches, including Edith Meiser, Sam Jaffe, Benjamin Kaye and Morrie Ryskind.
Directed by Philip Loeb with musical staging by Herbert Fields, the cast included Romney Brent, June Cochrane, Sterling Holloway, Libby Holman, Philip Loeb, Edith Meiser, Sanford Meisner, Betty Starbuck, and Lee Strasberg.
Sketches and musical numbers
The opening number, &quot;Soliciting Subscriptions&quot; was a spoof of the Theatre Guild's &quot;serious pretensions&quot;, along with the following song, &quot;Gilding the Guild&quot;. Ryskind wrote skits including a satire of President and Mrs. Calvin Coolidge, and a parody of the Scopes Trial, which was dropped from the show after William Jennings Bryan died. Libby Holman's solo, &quot;Black and White&quot; was later dropped. Sterling Holloway and June Cochrane introduced the song &quot;Manhattan&quot;, as its &quot;easygoing strolling melody and ingeniously rhymed lyric related all of the everyday pleasures to be found in New York...&quot;3
Songs
Note:music by Rodgers and lyrics by Hart except as noted.
Act 1
Soliciting Subscriptions
Gilding the Guild
Butcher, Baker, Candle-Stick Maker (Lyrics By Benjamin M. Kaye, Music By Mana Zucca)
An Old-Fashioned Girl (Lyrics By Edith Meiser)
April Fool
Stage Managers' Chorus (Lyrics By Lorenz Hart and Dudley Digges)
The Joy Spreader
Act 2
Rancho Mexicano (Music By Tatanacho)
Ladies of the Box Office
Mr. and Mrs.
Manhattan
The Three Musketeers
Do You Love Me (I Wonder)?
Black and White
References
External links
Internet Broadway database listing, all productions
Overview of show
Category:1925 musicals Category:Broadway musicals Category:Revues
Hischak, Thomas S. The Rodgers and Hammerstein encyclopedia (2007), Greenwood Publishing Group, ISBN 0313341400, p. 92↩
Hyland, William. Richard Rodgers (1998), Yale University Press, ISBN 0300071159, pp. 29- 33↩
