Intelligent design is the proposition that &quot;certain features of the universe and of living things are best explained by an intelligent cause, not an undirected process such as natural selection.&quot; 1 
&lt;!--
TEXT--&gt; It is a modern form of the traditional teleological argument for the existence of God, but one which purposefully avoids specifying the nature or identity of the designer.2 The idea was developed by a group of American creationists who reformulated their argument in the creation&lt;U+2013&gt;evolution controversy to circumvent court rulings that prohibit the teaching of creationism as science. 345 Intelligent design's leading proponents &lt;U+2013&gt; all of whom are associated with the Discovery Institute, a politically conservative think tank &quot;Q. Has the Discovery Institute been a leader in the intelligent design movement? A. Yes, the Discovery Institute's Center for Science and Culture. Q. And are almost all of the individuals who are involved with the intelligent design movement associated with the Discovery Institute? A. All of the leaders are, yes.&quot; Barbara Forrest, 2005, testifying in the Kitzmiller v. Dover Area School District trial. 
&quot;The Discovery Institute is the ideological and strategic backbone behind the eruption of skirmishes over science in school districts and state capitals across the country&quot;. In: 
&quot;The engine behind the ID movement is the Discovery Institute&quot;. 
 &lt;U+2013&gt; believe the designer to be the God of Christianity. 67
Advocates of intelligent design seek to fundamentally redefine science to accept supernatural explanations,  
, Whether ID Is Science
, Lead defense expert Professor Behe admitted that his broadened definition of science, which encompasses ID, would also include astrology.
See also &lt;!--
TEXT--&gt; arguing that intelligent design is a scientific theory under this new definition of science. 8 The unequivocal consensus in the scientific community is that intelligent design is not science. 91011 12  The U.S. National Academy of Sciences has stated that &quot;creationism, intelligent design, and other claims of supernatural intervention in the origin of life or of species are not science because they are not testable by the methods of science.&quot; 13 The U.S. National Science Teachers Association and the American Association for the Advancement of Science have termed it pseudoscience. National Science Teachers Association, a professional association of 55,000 science teachers and administrators 
&lt;!--
TEXT--&gt; Others in the scientific community have concurred, 14 and some have called it junk science.  
Robert T. Pennock Tower of Babel: The Evidence Against the New Creationism.
15
Intelligent design originated in response to the 1987 United States Supreme Court Edwards v. Aguillard ruling involving separation of church and state. 16 Its first significant published use was in Of Pandas and People, a 1989 textbook intended for high-school biology classes. 17 Several additional books on the subject were published in the 1990s. By the mid-1990s, intelligent design proponents had begun clustering around the Discovery Institute and more publicly advocating the inclusion of intelligent design in public school curricula.  
&lt;!--
TEXT--&gt; With the Discovery Institute and its Center for Science and Culture serving a central role in planning and funding, the &quot;intelligent design movement&quot; grew increasingly visible in the late 1990s and early 2000s, culminating in the 2005 Dover trial which challenged the intended use of intelligent design in public school science classes.18
In Kitzmiller v. Dover Area School District, a group of parents of high-school students challenged a public school district requirement for teachers to present intelligent design in biology classes as an alternative &quot;explanation of the origin of life&quot;. U.S. District Judge John E. Jones III ruled that intelligent design is not science, that it &quot;cannot uncouple itself from its creationist, and thus religious, antecedents&quot;, and that the school district's promotion of it therefore violated the Establishment Clause of the First Amendment to the U.S. Constitution. 19
History
Origin of the concept
 Whether the complexity of nature indicates purposeful design has been the subject of debate since the Greeks. In the 4th century BCE, Plato posited a good and wise &quot;demiurge&quot; as the creator and first cause of the cosmos in his Timaeus.2021 In his Metaphysics, Aristotle developed the idea of an &quot;Unmoved Mover&quot;.22 In De Natura Deorum (On the Nature of the Gods, 45 BCE) Cicero wrote that &quot;the divine power is to be found in a principle of reason which pervades the whole of nature.&quot;23 This line of reasoning has come to be known as the teleological argument for the existence of God. Some well-known forms of it were expressed in the 13th century by Thomas Aquinas and in the 19th century by William Paley. Aquinas, in his Summa Theologiae, used the concept of design in his &quot;fifth proof&quot; for God's existence.24
In the early 19th century, Paley's argument from design in Natural Theology (1802), used the watchmaker analogy,25 and such arguments led to the development of what was called natural theology, the study of nature as way of understanding &quot;the mind of God&quot;. This movement fueled the passion for collecting fossils and other biological specimens, which ultimately led to Charles Darwin's On the Origin of Species (1859). Similar reasoning postulating a divine designer is embraced today by many believers in theistic evolution, who consider modern science and the theory of evolution to be compatible with the concept of a supernatural designer. In correspondence about the question with Asa Gray, Darwin wrote that &quot;I cannot honestly go as far as you do about Design. I am conscious that I am in an utterly hopeless muddle. I cannot think that the world, as we see it, is the result of chance; &amp; yet I cannot look at each separate thing as the result of Design.&quot;26 Though he had studied Paley's work while at university, by the end of his life he came to regard it as useless for scientific development.27
Development of its modern form
Intelligent design in the late 20th and early 21st century is a development of natural theology that seeks to change the basis of science and undermine evolutionary theory.See, e.g., the publisher's editorial description of the 2006 paperback printing of William Paley (1803) ''Natural Theology&quot; : &quot;William Paley's classic brings depth to the history of intelligent design arguments. The contrivance of the eye, the ear, and numerous other anatomical features throughout the natural world are presented as arguments for God's presence and concern. While there are distinctive differences between Paley's argument and those used today by intelligent design theorists and creationists, it remains a fascinating glimpse of the nineteenth-century's debate over the roles of religion and science&quot;.
David C. Steinmetz (2005) &quot;The Debate on Intelligent Design&quot; in The Christian Century, (December 27, 2005, pp. 27&lt;U+2013&gt;31.)
Leading intelligent design proponent William Dembski (2001) argues the opposing view in Is Intelligent Design a form of natural theology? As evolutionary theory expanded to explain more phenomena, the examples held up as evidence of design changed, though the essential argument remains the same: complex systems imply a designer. Past examples have included the eye and the feathered wing; current examples are typically biochemical: protein functions, blood clotting, and bacterial flagella; see irreducible complexity.
Philosopher Barbara Forrest writes that the intelligent design movement began in 1984 with the publication by Jon A. Buell's the Foundation for Thought and Ethics of The Mystery of Life's Origin by Charles B. Thaxton, a chemist and creationist. Thaxton held a conference in 1988, &quot;Sources of Information Content in DNA,&quot; which attracted creationists such as Stephen C. Meyer. Forrest writes that, in December 1988, Thaxton decided to use the term &quot;intelligent design,&quot; instead of creationism, for the movement.28
In March 1986 a review by Meyer used information theory to suggest that messages transmitted by DNA in the cell show &quot;specified complexity&quot; specified by intelligence, and must have originated with an intelligent agent.29 In November of that year Thaxton described his reasoning as a more sophisticated form of Paley's argument from design.30 At the Sources of Information Content in DNA conference in 1988 he said that his intelligent cause view was compatible with both metaphysical naturalism and supernaturalism,31
Intelligent design avoids identifying or naming the agent of creation&lt;U+2014&gt;it merely states that one (or more) must exist&lt;U+2014&gt;but leaders of the movement have said the designer is the Christian God.32333435Stephen C. Meyer: &quot;I think the designer is God ...&quot; (Darwin, the marketing of Intelligent Design . Nightline ABC News, with Ted Koppel, August 10, 2005);
Nancy Pearcey: &quot;By contrast, design theory demonstrates that Christians can sit in the supernaturalist&lt;U+2019&gt;s &lt;U+201C&gt;chair&lt;U+201D&gt; even in their professional lives, seeing the cosmos through the lens of a comprehensive biblical worldview. Intelligent Design steps boldly into the scientific arena to build a case based on empirical data. It takes Christianity out of the ineffectual realm of value and stakes out a cognitive claim in the realm of objective truth. It restores Christianity to its status as genuine knowledge, equipping us to defend it in the public arena&quot;. (Total Truth, Crossway Books, June 29, 2004, ISBN 1581344589, pp. 204-205) Whether this lack of specificity about the designer's identity in public discussions is a genuine feature of the concept, or just a posture taken to avoid alienating those who would separate religion from the teaching of science, has been a matter of great debate between supporters and critics of intelligent design. The Kitzmiller v. Dover Area School District court ruling held the latter to be the case.
Origin of the term
  The phrase &quot;intelligent design&quot; can be found in an 1847 issue of Scientific American,36 in an 1850 book by Patrick Edward Dove,37 and in an 1861 letter from Charles Darwin.38 The phrase was used in an address to the 1873 annual meeting of the British Association for the Advancement of Science by Paleyite botanist George James Allman: 
The phrase can be found again in Humanism, a 1903 book by one of the founders of classical pragmatism, F.C.S. Schiller: &quot;It will not be possible to rule out the supposition that the process of evolution may be guided by an intelligent design&quot;. A derivative of the phrase appears in the Macmillan Encyclopedia of Philosophy (1967) in the article titled, &quot;Teleological argument for the existence of God&quot;: &quot;Stated most succinctly, the argument runs: The world exhibits teleological order (design, adaptation). Therefore, it was produced by an intelligent designer&quot;.39 Robert Nozick (1974) wrote: &quot;Consider now complicated patterns which one would have thought would arise only through intelligent design&quot;.40 The phrases &quot;intelligent design&quot; and &quot;intelligently designed&quot; were used in a 1979 philosophy book Chance or Design? by James Horigan41 and the phrase &quot;intelligent design&quot; was used in a 1982 speech by Sir Fred Hoyle in his promotion of panspermia.42
The modern use of the words &quot;intelligent design&quot;, as a term intended to describe a field of inquiry, began after the Supreme Court of the United States, in the case of Edwards v. Aguillard (1987), ruled that creationism is unconstitutional in public school science curricula. A Discovery Institute report says that Charles Thaxton, editor of Of Pandas and People, had picked the phrase up from a NASA scientist, and thought &quot;That's just what I need, it's a good engineering term&quot;.43 In drafts of the book over one hundred uses of the root word &quot;creation&quot;, such as &quot;creationism&quot; and &quot;creation science&quot;, were changed, almost without exception, to &quot;intelligent design&quot;,44 while &quot;creationists&quot; was changed to &quot;design proponents&quot; or, in one instance, &quot;cdesign proponentsists&quot;.45 In June 1988 Thaxton held a conference titled &quot;Sources of Information Content in DNA&quot; in Tacoma, Washington,46 and in December decided to use the label &quot;intelligent design&quot; for his new creationist movement.47 Stephen C. Meyer was at the conference, and later recalled that &quot;the term came up&quot;.48
Of Pandas and People was published in 1989, and was the first book to make frequent use of the phrases &quot;intelligent design,&quot; &quot;design proponents,&quot; and &quot;design theory&quot;, thus representing the beginning of the modern &quot;intelligent design&quot; movement.49 &quot;Intelligent design&lt;U+201D&gt; was the most prominent of around fifteen new terms it introduced as a new lexicon of creationist terminology to oppose evolution without using religious language.50 It was the first place where the phrase &quot;intelligent design&quot; appeared in its present use, as stated both by its publisher Jon Buell,5152 and by William A. Dembski in his expert witness report.53 The book presented all of the basic arguments of intelligent design proponents before any research had been done to support these arguments, and was actively promoted by creationists for public school use.54 Rethinking Schools magazine has criticized the book, saying it was a &quot;creationist treatise&quot; packaged to look like a high quality science textbook, with a &quot;glossy cover, full-color illustrations, and chapter titles such as 'Homology' and 'Genetics and Macroevolution'&quot;, with numerous &quot;professionally prepared charts and illustrations appear to show how concrete scientific evidence supports the existence of the unnamed 'designer'&quot;. Philosopher of science Michael Ruse believes the contents were &quot;worthless and dishonest&quot;, and it was described by an ACLU lawyer as a political tool aimed at students who did not &quot;know science or understand the controversy over evolution and creationism&quot;.55
Integral concepts
Irreducible complexity
 The term &quot;irreducible complexity&quot; was introduced by biochemist Michael Behe in his 1996 book Darwin's Black Box, though he had already described the concept in his contributions to the 1993 revised edition of Of Pandas and People.56 Behe defines it as &quot;a single system which is composed of several well-matched interacting parts that contribute to the basic function, wherein the removal of any one of the parts causes the system to effectively cease functioning&quot;.57
Behe uses the analogy of a mousetrap to illustrate this concept. A mousetrap consists of several interacting pieces&lt;U+2014&gt;the base, the catch, the spring and the hammer&lt;U+2014&gt;all of which must be in place for the mousetrap to work. Removal of any one piece destroys the function of the mousetrap. Intelligent design advocates assert that natural selection could not create irreducibly complex systems, because the selectable function is present only when all parts are assembled. Behe argued that irreducibly complex biological mechanisms include the bacterial flagellum of E. coli, the blood clotting cascade, cilia, and the adaptive immune system.5859
Critics point out that the irreducible complexity argument assumes that the necessary parts of a system have always been necessary and therefore could not have been added sequentially.6061 They argue that something which is at first merely advantageous can later become necessary as other components change. Furthermore, they argue, evolution often proceeds by altering preexisting parts or by removing them from a system, rather than by adding them. This is sometimes called the &quot;scaffolding objection&quot; by an analogy with scaffolding, which can support an &quot;irreducibly complex&quot; building until it is complete and able to stand on its own.62 Behe has acknowledged using &quot;sloppy prose&quot;, and that his &quot;argument against Darwinism does not add up to a logical proof&quot;.63 Irreducible complexity has remained a popular argument among advocates of intelligent design; in the Dover trial, the court held that &quot;Professor Behe's claim for irreducible complexity has been refuted in peer-reviewed research papers and has been rejected by the scientific community at large&quot;.64
Specified complexity
In 1986 the creationist chemist Charles Thaxton used the term &quot;specified complexity&quot; from information theory when claiming that messages transmitted by DNA in the cell were specified by intelligence, and must have originated with an intelligent agent.65 The intelligent design concept of &quot;specified complexity&quot; was developed in the 1990s by mathematician, philosopher, and theologian William Dembski. Dembski states that when something exhibits specified complexity (i.e., is both complex and &quot;specified&quot;, simultaneously), one can infer that it was produced by an intelligent cause (i.e., that it was designed) rather than being the result of natural processes. He provides the following examples: &quot;A single letter of the alphabet is specified without being complex. A long sentence of random letters is complex without being specified. A Shakespearean sonnet is both complex and specified&quot;.66 He states that details of living things can be similarly characterized, especially the &quot;patterns&quot; of molecular sequences in functional biological molecules such as DNA.
 Dembski defines complex specified information (CSI) as anything with a less than 1 in 10150 chance of occurring by (natural) chance. Critics say that this renders the argument a tautology: complex specified information cannot occur naturally because Dembski has defined it thus, so the real question becomes whether or not CSI actually exists in nature.676869
The conceptual soundness of Dembski's specified complexity/CSI argument has been widely discredited by the scientific and mathematical communities.707172 Specified complexity has yet to be shown to have wide applications in other fields as Dembski asserts. John Wilkins and Wesley Elsberry characterize Dembski's &quot;explanatory filter&quot; as eliminative, because it eliminates explanations sequentially: first regularity, then chance, finally defaulting to design. They argue that this procedure is flawed as a model for scientific inference because the asymmetric way it treats the different possible explanations renders it prone to making false conclusions.73
Richard Dawkins, another critic of intelligent design, argues in The God Delusion that allowing for an intelligent designer to account for unlikely complexity only postpones the problem, as such a designer would need to be at least as complex.74 Other scientists have argued that evolution through selection is better able to explain the observed complexity, as is evident from the use of selective evolution to design certain electronic, aeronautic and automotive systems which are considered problems too complex for human &quot;intelligent designers&quot;.75
Fine-tuned Universe
Intelligent design proponents have also occasionally appealed to broader teleological arguments outside of biology, most notably an argument based on the fine-tuning of universal constants that make matter and life possible and which are argued not to be solely attributable to chance. These include the values of fundamental physical constants, the relative strength of nuclear forces, electromagnetism, and gravity between fundamental particles, as well as the ratios of masses of such particles. Intelligent design proponent and Center for Science and Culture fellow Guillermo Gonzalez argues that if any of these values were even slightly different, the universe would be dramatically different, making it impossible for many chemical elements and features of the Universe, such as galaxies, to form.76 Thus, proponents argue, an intelligent designer of life was needed to ensure that the requisite features were present to achieve that particular outcome.
Scientists have generally responded that this argument cannot be tested and is therefore not science but metaphysics. Some scientists argue that even when taken as mere speculation, these arguments are poorly supported by existing evidence.77 Victor J. Stenger and other critics say both intelligent design and the weak form of the anthropic principle are essentially a tautology; in his view, these arguments amount to the claim that life is able to exist because the Universe is able to support life.787980 The claim of the improbability of a life-supporting universe has also been criticized as an argument by lack of imagination for assuming no other forms of life are possible. Life as we know it might not exist if things were different, but a different sort of life might exist in its place. A number of critics also suggest that many of the stated variables appear to be interconnected and that calculations made by mathematicians and physicists suggest that the emergence of a universe similar to ours is quite probable.81
Proponent Granville Sewell argues that the evolution of complex forms of life represents a decrease of entropy, and that it thus violates the second law of thermodynamics and so supports intelligent design.82 This, however, is a misapplication of thermodynamic principles.83 The second law applies to closed systems only. If Granville's argument were valid, living things could not be born and grow, as this also would be a decrease in entropy. Neither evolution nor the growth of living things violates the second law of thermodynamics because living things are not closed systems&lt;U+2014&gt;they have external energy sources (e.g. food, oxygen, sunlight) whose production requires an offsetting net increase in entropy.
Intelligent designer
Intelligent design arguments are formulated in secular terms and intentionally avoid identifying the intelligent agent (or agents) they posit. Although they do not state that God is the designer, the designer is often implicitly hypothesized to have intervened in a way that only a god could intervene. Dembski, in The Design Inference, speculates that an alien culture could fulfill these requirements. The authoritative description of intelligent design,84 however, explicitly states that the Universe displays features of having been designed. Acknowledging the paradox, Dembski concludes that &quot;no intelligent agent who is strictly physical could have presided over the origin of the universe or the origin of life&quot;.85 The leading proponents have made statements to their supporters that they believe the designer to be the Christian God, to the exclusion of all other religions.868788
Beyond the debate over whether intelligent design is scientific, a number of critics argue that existing evidence makes the design hypothesis appear unlikely, irrespective of its status in the world of science. For example, Jerry Coyne asks why a designer would &quot;give us a pathway for making vitamin C, but then destroy it by disabling one of its enzymes&quot; (see pseudogene) and why he or she would not &quot;stock oceanic islands with reptiles, mammals, amphibians, and freshwater fish, despite the suitability of such islands for these species&quot;. Coyne also points to the fact that &quot;the flora and fauna on those islands resemble that of the nearest mainland, even when the environments are very different&quot; as evidence that species were not placed there by a designer.89 Previously, in Darwin's Black Box, Behe had argued that we are simply incapable of understanding the designer's motives, so such questions cannot be answered definitively. Odd designs could, for example, &quot;have been placed there by the designer ... for artistic reasons, to show off, for some as-yet undetectable practical purpose, or for some unguessable reason&quot;. Coyne responds that in light of the evidence, &quot;either life resulted not from intelligent design, but from evolution; or the intelligent designer is a cosmic prankster who designed everything to make it look as though it had evolved&quot;.90
Asserting the need for a designer of complexity also raises the question &quot;What designed the designer?&quot;91 Intelligent design proponents say that the question is irrelevant to or outside the scope of intelligent design.92 Richard Wein counters that the unanswered questions an explanation creates &quot;must be balanced against the improvements in our understanding which the explanation provides. Invoking an unexplained being to explain the origin of other beings (ourselves) is little more than question-begging. The new question raised by the explanation is as problematic as the question which the explanation purports to answer&quot;.93 Richard Dawkins sees the assertion that the designer does not need to be explained, not as a contribution to knowledge, but as a thought-terminating clich&lt;U+00E9&gt;.9495 In the absence of observable, measurable evidence, the very question &quot;What designed the designer?&quot; leads to an infinite regression from which intelligent design proponents can only escape by resorting to religious creationism or logical contradiction.9697
Movement
The Discovery Institute's Center for the Renewal of Science and Culture used banners based on &quot;The Creation of Adam&quot; from the Sistine Chapel. Later it used a less religious image, then was renamed the Center for Science and Culture.98
The intelligent design movement is a direct outgrowth of the creationism of the 1980s.99 The scientific and academic communities, along with a U.S. federal court, view intelligent design as either a form of creationism or as a direct descendant that is closely intertwined with traditional creationism;100101102103 and several authors explicitly refer to it as &quot;intelligent design creationism&quot;.104105106
The movement is headquartered in the Center for Science and Culture (CSC), established in 1996 as the creationist wing of the Discovery Institute to promote a religious agenda107 calling for broad social, academic and political changes. The Discovery Institute's intelligent design campaigns have been staged primarily in the United States, although efforts have been made in other countries to promote intelligent design. Leaders of the movement say intelligent design exposes the limitations of scientific orthodoxy and of the secular philosophy of naturalism. Intelligent design proponents allege that science should not be limited to naturalism and should not demand the adoption of a naturalistic philosophy that dismisses out-of-hand any explanation which contains a supernatural cause. The overall goal of the movement is to &quot;defeat [the] materialist world view&quot; represented by the theory of evolution in favor of &quot;a science consonant with Christian and theistic convictions&quot;.108
Phillip E. Johnson stated that the goal of intelligent design is to cast creationism as a scientific concept.109110 All leading intelligent design proponents are fellows or staff of the Discovery Institute and its Center for Science and Culture.111 Nearly all intelligent design concepts and the associated movement are the products of the Discovery Institute, which guides the movement and follows its wedge strategy while conducting its Teach the Controversy campaign and their other related programs.
Leading intelligent design proponents have made conflicting statements regarding intelligent design. In statements directed at the general public, they say intelligent design is not religious; when addressing conservative Christian supporters, they state that intelligent design has its foundation in the Bible.112 Recognizing the need for support, the institute affirms its Christian, evangelistic orientation: &quot;Alongside a focus on influential opinion-makers, we also seek to build up a popular base of support among our natural constituency, namely, Christians. We will do this primarily through apologetics seminars. We intend these to encourage and equip believers with new scientific evidences that support the faith, as well as to 'popularize' our ideas in the broader culture.&quot;113
Barbara Forrest, an expert who has written extensively on the movement, describes this as being due to the Discovery Institute's obfuscating its agenda as a matter of policy. She has written that the movement's &quot;activities betray an aggressive, systematic agenda for promoting not only intelligent design creationism, but the religious world-view that undergirds it&quot;.114
Religion and leading proponents
Although arguments for intelligent design are formulated in secular terms and intentionally avoid positing the identity of the designer, 115 the majority of principal intelligent design advocates are publicly religious Christians who have stated that in their view the designer proposed in intelligent design is the Christian conception of God. Stuart Burgess, Phillip E. Johnson, William Dembski, and Stephen C. Meyer are evangelical Protestants, and Michael Behe is a Roman Catholic, while Jonathan Wells is a member of the Unification Church. Phillip E. Johnson has stated that cultivating ambiguity by employing secular language in arguments that are carefully crafted to avoid overtones of theistic creationism is a necessary first step for ultimately reintroducing the Christian concept of God as the designer. Johnson explicitly calls for intelligent design proponents to obfuscate their religious motivations so as to avoid having intelligent design identified &quot;as just another way of packaging the Christian evangelical message&quot;.116 Johnson emphasizes that &quot;the first thing that has to be done is to get the Bible out of the discussion&quot;; &quot;after we have separated materialist prejudice from scientific fact [...] only then can 'biblical issues' be discussed&quot;.117
The strategy of deliberately disguising the religious intent of intelligent design has been described by William Dembski in The Design Inference.118 In this work Dembski lists a god or an &quot;alien life force&quot; as two possible options for the identity of the designer; however, in his book Intelligent Design: The Bridge Between Science and Theology, Dembski states that &quot;Christ is indispensable to any scientific theory, even if its practitioners don't have a clue about him. The pragmatics of a scientific theory can, to be sure, be pursued without recourse to Christ. But the conceptual soundness of the theory can in the end only be located in Christ.&quot;119 Dembski also stated, &quot;ID is part of God's general revelation [...] Not only does intelligent design rid us of this ideology (materialism), which suffocates the human spirit, but, in my personal experience, I've found that it opens the path for people to come to Christ&quot;.120 Both Johnson and Dembski cite the Bible's Gospel of John as the foundation of intelligent design.121122
Barbara Forrest contends such statements reveal that leading proponents see intelligent design as essentially religious in nature, not merely a scientific concept that has implications with which their personal religious beliefs happen to coincide.123 She writes that the leading proponents of intelligent design are closely allied with the ultra-conservative Christian Reconstructionism movement. She lists connections of (current and former) Discovery Institute Fellows Phillip Johnson, Charles Thaxton, Michael Behe, Richard Weikart, Jonathan Wells and Francis Beckwith to leading Christian Reconstructionist organizations, and the extent of the funding provided the Institute by Howard Ahmanson Jr., a leading figure in the Reconstructionist movement.124
Reaction from other creationist groups
Not all creationist organizations have embraced the intelligent design movement. Hugh Ross of Reasons to Believe, a proponent of Old Earth creationism, believes that the efforts of intelligent design proponents to divorce the concept from Biblical Christianity make its hypothesis too vague. In 2002 he wrote: &quot;Winning the argument for design without identifying the designer yields, at best, a sketchy origins model. Such a model makes little if any positive impact on the community of scientists and other scholars&lt;U+2026&gt; The time is right for a direct approach, a single leap into the origins fray. Introducing a biblically based, scientifically verifiable creation model represents such a leap.&quot;125
Likewise, two of the most prominent Young Earth creationism organizations in the world have attempted to distinguish their views from intelligent design. Henry M. Morris of the Institute for Creation Research (ICR) wrote, in 1999, that ID, &quot;even if well-meaning and effectively articulated, will not work! It has often been tried in the past and has failed, and it will fail today. The reason it won't work is because it is not the Biblical method.&lt;U+201D&gt; According to Morris: &lt;U+201C&gt;The evidence of intelligent design&lt;U+2026&gt; must be either followed by or accompanied by a sound presentation of true Biblical creationism if it is to be meaningful and lasting.&quot;126 In 2002, Carl Wieland of Answers in Genesis (AiG) criticized design advocates who, though well-intentioned, &quot;left the Bible out of it&quot; and thereby unwittingly aided and abetted the modern rejection of the Bible. Wieland explained that &quot;AiG's major 'strategy' is to boldly, but humbly, call the church back to its Biblical foundations&lt;U+2026&gt; [so] we neither count ourselves a part of this movement nor campaign against it.&quot;127
Polls
Several surveys were conducted prior to the December 2005 decision in Kitzmiller v. Dover, which sought to determine the level of support for intelligent design among certain groups. According to a 2005 Harris poll, 10% of adults in the United States viewed human beings as &quot;so complex that they required a powerful force or intelligent being to help create them&quot;.128 Although Zogby polls commissioned by the Discovery Institute show more support, these polls suffer from considerable flaws, such as having a very low response rate (248 out of 16,000), being conducted on behalf of an organization with an expressed interest in the outcome of the poll, and containing leading questions.129130131
A May 2005 survey of nearly 1500 physicians in the United States conducted by the Louis Finkelstein Institute and HCD Research showed that 63% of the physicians agreed more with evolution than with intelligent design.132
A series of Gallup polls in the United States from 1982 through 2008 on &quot;Evolution, Creationism, Intelligent Design&quot; found support for &quot;human beings have developed over millions of years from less advanced formed of life, but God guided the process&quot; of between 35% and 40%, support for &quot;God created human beings in pretty much their present form at one time within the last 10,000 years or so&quot; varied from 43% to 47%, and support for &quot;human beings have developed over millions of years from less advanced formed of life, but God had no part in the process&quot; varied from 9% to 14%. The polls also noted answers to a series of more detailed questions.133
Film
The film Expelled: No Intelligence Allowed sparked further controversy in 2008. This documentary, hosted by Ben Stein, spends much time focusing on professors who have been asked to leave or have left numerous institutions because, the film insinuates, of their beliefs in Intelligent Design. One of the film's first screenings resulted in Paul &quot;PZ&quot; Myers, an interviewee in the film, being asked to leave the theater. There have also been allegations from some interviewees that interviews were recorded many times in order to get the exact phrasing required by the producer. The production company, Premise Media, also has helped finance some religious films such as The Passion of the Christ. 134 135
Creating and teaching the controversy
A key strategy of the intelligent design movement is convincing the general public that there is a debate among scientists about whether life evolved. The intelligent design movement creates this controversy in order to convince the public, politicians and cultural leaders that schools should &quot;Teach the Controversy&quot;.136 But in fact, there is no such controversy in the scientific community; the scientific consensus is that life evolved.137138From the world's largest general scientific society:
 Intelligent design is widely viewed as a stalking horse for its proponents' campaign against what they say is the materialist foundation of science, which they argue leaves no room for the possibility of God.139140
Advocates of intelligent design seek to keep God and the Bible out of the discussion, and present intelligent design in the language of science as a scientific hypothesis.141142 However, among a very significant proportion of the general public in the United States the major concern is whether conventional evolutionary biology is compatible with belief in God and in the Bible, and how this issue is taught in schools.143 The public controversy was given widespread media coverage in the United States, particularly during the Kitzmiller v. Dover trial in late 2005 and after President George W. Bush expressed support for the idea of teaching intelligent design alongside evolution in August 2005. In response to Bush&lt;U+2019&gt;s statement and the pending federal trial, Time magazine ran an eight-page cover story on the Evolution Wars in which they examined the issue of teaching intelligent design in the classroom.144145 The cover of the magazine featured a parody of The Creation of Adam from the Sistine Chapel. Rather than pointing at Adam, Michelangelo&lt;U+2019&gt;s God points at the image of a chimpanzee contemplating the caption which read &quot;The push to teach &quot;intelligent design&quot; raises a question: Does God have a place in science class?&quot;.
 In the Kitzmiller v. Dover case, the court ruled that intelligent design was a religious and creationist position, finding that God and intelligent design were both distinct from the material that should be covered in a science class.146
Empirical science uses the scientific method to create a posteriori knowledge based on observation and repeated testing of hypotheses and theories. Intelligent design proponents seek to change this fundamental basis of science147 by eliminating &quot;methodological naturalism&quot; from science148 and replacing it with what the leader of the intelligent design movement, Phillip E. Johnson, calls &quot;theistic realism&quot;.149 Some have called this approach &quot;methodological supernaturalism&quot;, which means belief in a transcendent, nonnatural dimension of reality inhabited by a transcendent, nonnatural deity.150 Intelligent design proponents argue that naturalistic explanations fail to explain certain phenomena and that supernatural explanations provide a very simple and intuitive explanation for the origins of life and the universe.151 Proponents say evidence exists in the forms of irreducible complexity and specified complexity that cannot be explained by natural processes.152 They also hold that religious neutrality requires the teaching of both evolution and intelligent design in schools, saying that teaching only evolution unfairly discriminates against those holding creationist beliefs. Teaching both, they argue, allows for the possibility of religious belief, without causing the state to actually promote such beliefs. Many intelligent design followers believe that &quot;Scientism&quot; is itself a religion that promotes secularism and materialism in an attempt to erase theism from public life, and they view their work in the promotion of intelligent design as a way to return religion to a central role in education and other public spheres. Some allege that this larger debate is often the subtext for arguments made over intelligent design, though others note that intelligent design serves as an effective proxy for the religious beliefs of prominent intelligent design proponents in their efforts to advance their religious point of view within society.153154155
Intelligent design has not presented a credible scientific case and is an attempt to teach religion in public schools, substituting public support for scientific research.156 If the argument to give &quot;equal time for all theories&quot; were actually practiced, there would be no logical limit to the number of mutually incompatible supernatural &quot;theories&quot; regarding the origins and diversity of life to be taught in the public school system, including intelligent design parodies such as the Flying Spaghetti Monster &quot;theory&quot;; intelligent design does not provide a mechanism for discriminating among them. Philosopher of biology Elliott Sober, for example, states that intelligent design is not falsifiable because &quot;[d]efenders of ID always have a way out&quot;.157158 Intelligent design proponent Michael Behe concedes &quot;You can't prove intelligent design by experiment&quot;.159
Intelligent design proponents cannot legitimately infer that an intelligent designer is behind the part of the process that is not understood scientifically, since they have not shown that anything supernatural has occurred. The inference that an intelligent designer created life on Earth, which advocate William Dembski has said could alternately be an &quot;alien&quot; life force,160 has been compared to the a priori claim that aliens helped the ancient Egyptians build the pyramids.161162 In both cases, the effect of this outside intelligence is not repeatable, observable or falsifiable, and it violates the principle of parsimony. From a strictly empirical standpoint, one may list what is known about Egyptian construction techniques, but one must admit ignorance about exactly how the Egyptians built the pyramids.
Supporters of intelligent design have also reached out to other faith groups with similar accounts of creation with the hope that the broader coalition will have greater influence in supporting science education that does not contradict their religious views.163 Many religious bodies have responded by expressing support for evolution. The Roman Catholic church has stated that religious faith is fully compatible with science, which is limited to dealing only with the natural world164 &lt;U+2014&gt; a position described by the term theistic evolution.165 As well as pointing out that intelligent design is not science, they also reject it for various philosophical and theological reasons.166167 The arguments of intelligent design have been directly challenged by the over 10,000 clergy who signed the Clergy Letter Project. Prominent scientists who strongly express religious faith, such as the astronomer George Coyne and the biologist Ken Miller, have been at the forefront of opposition to intelligent design. While creationist organizations have welcomed intelligent design's support against naturalism, they have also been critical of its refusal to identify the designer,168169170 and have pointed to previous failures of the same argument.171
Rabbi Natan Slifkin directly criticized the advocates of intelligent design as presenting a perspective of God that is dangerous to religion.172 Those who promote it as parallel to religion, he asserts, do not truly understand it. Slifkin criticizes intelligent design's advocacy of teaching their perspective in biology classes, wondering why no one claims that God's hand should be taught in other secular classes, such as history, physics or geology. Slifkin also asserts that the intelligent design movement is inordinately concerned with portraying God as &quot;in control&quot; when it comes to things that cannot be easily explained by science, but not in control in respect to things which can be explained by scientific theory.173 Kenneth Miller expressed a view similar to Slifkin's: &quot;[T]he struggles of the Intelligent Design movement are best understood as clamorous and disappointing double failures - rejected by science because they do not fit the facts, and having failed religion because they think too little of God.174
Defining science
The scientific method is a body of techniques for investigating phenomena and acquiring new knowledge of the natural world without assuming the existence or nonexistence of the supernatural, an approach sometimes called methodological naturalism. Intelligent design proponents believe that this can be equated to materialist metaphysical naturalism, and have often said that not only is their own position scientific, but it is even more scientific than evolution, and that they want a redefinition of science as a revived natural theology or natural philosophy to allow &quot;non-naturalistic theories such as intelligent design&quot;.175 This presents a demarcation problem, which in the philosophy of science is about how and where to draw the lines around science.176 For a theory to qualify as scientific,177178179 it is expected to be:
Consistent
Parsimonious (sparing in its proposed entities or explanations, see Occam's Razor)
Useful (describes and explains observed phenomena, and can be used predictively)
Empirically testable and falsifiable (see Falsifiability)
Based on multiple observations, often in the form of controlled, repeated experiments
Correctable and dynamic (modified in the light of observations that do not support it)
Progressive (refines previous theories)
Provisional or tentative (is open to experimental checking, and does not assert certainty)
For any theory, hypothesis or conjecture to be considered scientific, it must meet most, and ideally all, of these criteria. The fewer criteria are met, the less scientific it is; and if it meets only a few or none at all, then it cannot be treated as scientific in any meaningful sense of the word. Typical objections to defining intelligent design as science are that it lacks consistency,180 violates the principle of parsimony,181 is not scientifically useful,182 is not falsifiable,183 is not empirically testable,184 and is not correctable, dynamic, provisional or progressive.185186187
Critics also say that the intelligent design doctrine does not meet the Daubert Standard,188 the criteria for scientific evidence mandated by the US Supreme Court. The Daubert Standard governs which evidence can be considered scientific in United States federal courts and most state courts. Its four criteria are:
The theoretical underpinnings of the methods must yield testable predictions by means of which the theory could be falsified.
The methods should preferably be published in a peer-reviewed journal.
There should be a known rate of error that can be used in evaluating the results.
The methods should be generally accepted within the relevant scientific community.
In Kitzmiller v. Dover Area School District, using these criteria and others mentioned above, Judge Jones ruled that &quot;... we have addressed the seminal question of whether ID is science. We have concluded that it is not, and moreover that ID cannot uncouple itself from its creationist, and thus religious, antecedents&quot;.
Against this, the philosopher Thomas Nagel argues that intelligent design is very different from creation science, in that it does not depend on distortion of evidence, or on the assumption that it is immune to empirical evidence. It depends only on the idea that the hypothesis of a designer makes sense. Whatever the merits of the positions, he argues that it is a scientific disagreement, not a disagreement between science and something else.189
Peer review
The failure to follow the procedures of scientific discourse and the failure to submit work to the scientific community that withstands scrutiny have weighed against intelligent design's being considered as valid science.190 The intelligent design movement has not published a properly peer-reviewed article in a scientific journal.191
Intelligent design, by appealing to a supernatural agent, directly conflicts with the principles of science, which limit its inquiries to empirical, observable and ultimately testable data and which require explanations to be based on empirical evidence. Dembski, Behe and other intelligent design proponents say bias by the scientific community is to blame for the failure of their research to be published.192 Intelligent design proponents believe that their writings are rejected for not conforming to purely naturalistic, non-supernatural mechanisms rather than because their research is not up to &quot;journal standards&quot;, and that the merit of their articles is overlooked. Some scientists describe this claim as a conspiracy theory.193 Michael Shermer has rebutted the claim, noting &quot;Anyone who thinks that scientists do not question Darwinism has never been to an evolutionary conference.&quot; He noted that scientists such as Joan Roughgarden and Lynn Margulis have challenged certain Darwinist theories and offered explanations of their own and despite this they &quot;have not been persecuted, shunned, fired or even expelled. Why? Because they are doing science, not religion.&quot;194 The issue that supernatural explanations do not conform to the scientific method became a sticking point for intelligent design proponents in the 1990s, and is addressed in the wedge strategy as an aspect of science that must be challenged before intelligent design can be accepted by the broader scientific community.
The debate over whether intelligent design produces new research, as any scientific field must, and has legitimately attempted to publish this research, is extremely heated. Both critics and advocates point to numerous examples to make their case. For instance, the Templeton Foundation, a former funder of the Discovery Institute and a major supporter of projects seeking to reconcile science and religion, says that it asked intelligent design proponents to submit proposals for actual research, but none were ever submitted. Charles L. Harper Jr., foundation vice-president, said: &quot;From the point of view of rigor and intellectual seriousness, the intelligent design people don't come out very well in our world of scientific review&quot;.195
The only article published in a peer-reviewed scientific journal that made a case for intelligent design was quickly withdrawn by the publisher for having circumvented the journal's peer-review standards.196 Written by the Discovery Institute's Center for Science &amp; Culture Director Stephen C. Meyer, it appeared in the peer-reviewed journal Proceedings of the Biological Society of Washington in August 2004.197 The article was a literature review, which means that it did not present any new research, but rather culled quotations and claims from other papers to argue that the Cambrian explosion could not have happened by natural processes. The choice of venue for this article was also considered problematic, because it was so outside the normal subject matter (see Sternberg peer review controversy198). Dembski has written that &quot;perhaps the best reason [to be skeptical of his ideas] is that intelligent design has yet to establish itself as a thriving scientific research program.&quot;199 In a 2001 interview, Dembski said that he stopped submitting to peer-reviewed journals because of their slow time-to-print and that he makes more money from publishing books.200
In the Dover trial, the judge found that intelligent design features no scientific research or testing.201 There, intelligent design proponents cited just one paper, on simulation modeling of evolution by Behe and Snoke,202 which mentioned neither irreducible complexity nor intelligent design and which Behe admitted did not rule out known evolutionary mechanisms.203 Michael Lynch called the conclusions of the article &quot;an artifact of unwarranted biological assumptions, inappropriate mathematical modeling, and faulty logic&quot;.204 In sworn testimony, however, Behe said: &quot;There are no peer reviewed articles by anyone advocating for intelligent design supported by pertinent experiments or calculations which provide detailed rigorous accounts of how intelligent design of any biological system occurred&quot;.205 As summarized by the judge, Behe conceded that there are no peer-reviewed articles supporting his claims of intelligent design or irreducible complexity. In his ruling, the judge wrote: &quot;A final indicator of how ID has failed to demonstrate scientific warrant is the complete absence of peer-reviewed publications supporting the theory&quot;.206
The Discovery Institute insists that a number of intelligent design articles have been published in peer-reviewed journals,207 including in its list the two articles mentioned above. Critics, largely members of the scientific community, reject this claim, stating that no established scientific journal has yet published an intelligent design article. Instead, intelligent design proponents have set up their own journals with &quot;peer review&quot; which lack impartiality and rigor,208 consisting entirely of intelligent design supporters.209
Intelligence as an observable quality
The phrase intelligent design makes use of an assumption of the quality of an observable intelligence, a concept that has no scientific consensus definition. William Dembski, for example, has written that &quot;Intelligence leaves behind a characteristic signature&quot;. The characteristics of intelligence are assumed by intelligent design proponents to be observable without specifying what the criteria for the measurement of intelligence should be. Dembski, instead, asserts that &quot;in special sciences ranging from forensics to archaeology to SETI (the Search for Extraterrestrial Intelligence), appeal to a designing intelligence is indispensable&quot;.210 How this appeal is made and what this implies as to the definition of intelligence are topics left largely unaddressed. Seth Shostak, a researcher with the SETI Institute, disputed Dembski's comparison of SETI and intelligent design, saying that intelligent design advocates base their inference of design on complexity&lt;U+2014&gt;the argument being that some biological systems are too complex to have been made by natural processes&lt;U+2014&gt;while SETI researchers are looking primarily for artificiality.211
Critics say that the design detection methods proposed by intelligent design proponents are radically different from conventional design detection, undermining the key elements that make it possible as legitimate science. Intelligent design proponents, they say, are proposing both searching for a designer without knowing anything about that designer's abilities, parameters, or intentions (which scientists do know when searching for the results of human intelligence), as well as denying the very distinction between natural/artificial design that allows scientists to compare complex designed artifacts against the background of the sorts of complexity found in nature.212
As a means of criticism, certain skeptics have pointed to a challenge of intelligent design derived from the study of artificial intelligence. The criticism is a counter to intelligent design claims about what makes a design intelligent, specifically that &quot;no preprogrammed device can be truly intelligent, that intelligence is irreducible to natural processes&quot;.213 This claim is similar in type to an assumption of Cartesian dualism that posits a strict separation between &quot;mind&quot; and the material Universe. However, in studies of artificial intelligence, while there is an implicit assumption that supposed &quot;intelligence&quot; or creativity of a computer program is determined by the capabilities given to it by the computer programmer, artificial intelligence need not be bound to an inflexible system of rules. Rather, if a computer program can access randomness as a function, this effectively allows for a flexible, creative, and adaptive intelligence. Evolutionary algorithms, a subfield of machine learning (itself a subfield of artificial intelligence), have been used to mathematically demonstrate that randomness and selection can be used to &quot;evolve&quot; complex, highly adapted structures that are not explicitly designed by a programmer. Evolutionary algorithms use the Darwinian metaphor of random mutation, selection and the survival of the fittest to solve diverse mathematical and scientific problems that are usually not solvable using conventional methods. Intelligence derived from randomness is essentially indistinguishable from the &quot;innate&quot; intelligence associated with biological organisms, and poses a challenge to the intelligent design conception that intelligence itself necessarily requires a designer. Cognitive science continues to investigate the nature of intelligence along these lines of inquiry. The intelligent design community, for the most part, relies on the assumption that intelligence is readily apparent as a fundamental and basic property of complex systems.214
Arguments from ignorance
Eugenie Scott, along with Glenn Branch and other critics, has argued that many points raised by intelligent design proponents are arguments from ignorance.215 In the argument from ignorance, a lack of evidence for one view is erroneously argued to constitute proof of the correctness of another view. Scott and Branch say that intelligent design is an argument from ignorance because it relies on a lack of knowledge for its conclusion: lacking a natural explanation for certain specific aspects of evolution, we assume intelligent cause. They contend most scientists would reply that the unexplained is not unexplainable, and that &quot;we don't know yet&quot; is a more appropriate response than invoking a cause outside science.216 Particularly, Michael Behe's demands for ever more detailed explanations of the historical evolution of molecular systems seem to assume a false dichotomy, where either evolution or design is the proper explanation, and any perceived failure of evolution becomes a victory for design. Scott and Branch also contend that the supposedly novel contributions proposed by intelligent design proponents have not served as the basis for any productive scientific research.
Intelligent design has also been characterized as a &quot;god of the gaps&quot; argument, which has the following form:
:*There is a gap in scientific knowledge.
:*The gap is filled with acts of God (or intelligent designer) and therefore proves the existence of God (or intelligent designer).
A god-of-the-gaps argument is the theological version of an argument from ignorance. A key feature of this type of argument is that it merely answers outstanding questions with explanations (often supernatural) that are unverifiable and ultimately themselves subject to unanswerable questions.217
Kitzmiller trial
Kitzmiller v. Dover Area School District was the first direct challenge brought in the United States federal courts against a public school district that required the presentation of intelligent design as an alternative to evolution. The plaintiffs successfully argued that intelligent design is a form of creationism, and that the school board policy thus violated the Establishment Clause of the First Amendment to the United States Constitution.218
Eleven parents of students in Dover, Pennsylvania, sued the Dover Area School District over a statement that the school board required be read aloud in ninth-grade science classes when evolution was taught. The plaintiffs were represented by the American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU), Americans United for Separation of Church and State (AU) and Pepper Hamilton LLP. The National Center for Science Education (NCSE) acted as consultants for the plaintiffs. The defendants were represented by the Thomas More Law Center.219 The suit was tried in a bench trial from September 26, 2005 to November 4, 2005 before Judge John E. Jones III. Ken Miller, Kevin Padian, Brian Alters, Robert Pennock, Barbara Forrest and John Haught served as expert witnesses for the prosecution. Michael Behe, Steve Fuller and Scott Minnich served as expert witnesses for the defense.
On December 20, 2005 Judge Jones issued his 139-page findings of fact and decision, ruling that the Dover mandate was unconstitutional, and barring intelligent design from being taught in Pennsylvania's Middle District public school science classrooms. The eight Dover school board members who voted for the intelligent design requirement were all defeated in a November 8, 2005 election by challengers who opposed the teaching of intelligent design in a science class, and the current school board president stated that the board does not intend to appeal the ruling.220
In his finding of facts, Judge Jones made the following condemnation of the Teach the Controversy strategy: 
Reaction
Judge Jones himself anticipated that his ruling would be criticized, saying in his decision that: 
As Jones had predicted, John G. West, Associate Director of the Center for Science and Culture at Discovery Institute, said:  Newspapers have noted with interest that the judge is &quot;a Republican and a churchgoer&quot;.221222223224
Subsequently, the decision has been examined in a search for flaws and conclusions, partly by intelligent design supporters aiming to avoid future defeats in court. In the Spring of 2007 the University of Montana Law review published three articles.225 In the first, David K. DeWolf, John G. West and Casey Luskin, all of the Discovery Institute, argued that intelligent design is a valid scientific theory, the Jones court should not have addressed the question of whether it was a scientific theory, and that the Kitzmiller decision will have no effect at all on the development and adoption of intelligent design as an alternative to standard evolutionary theory.226 In the second Peter Irons responded, arguing that the decision was extremely well reasoned and spells the death knell for the intelligent design efforts to introduce creationism in public schools,227 while in the third, DeWolf et al. answer the points made by Irons.228 However, fear of a similar lawsuit has resulted in other school boards abandoning intelligent design &quot;teach the controversy&quot; proposals.229
In April 2010, the American Academy of Religion issued Guidelines for Teaching About Religion in K&lt;U+2010&gt;12 Public Schools in the United States which included guidance that creation science or intelligent design should not be taught in science classes, as &quot;Creation science and intelligent design represent worldviews that fall outside of the realm of science that is defined as (and limited to) a method of inquiry based on gathering observable and measurable evidence subject to specific principles of reasoning.&quot; However, they, as well as other &quot;worldviews that focus on speculation regarding the origins of life represent another important and relevant form of human inquiry that is appropriately studied in literature or social sciences courses. Such study, however, must include a diversity of worldviews representing a variety of religious and philosophical perspectives and must avoid privileging one view as more legitimate than others.&quot;230
Status outside the United States
Europe
In June 2007 the Council of Europe's &quot;Committee on Culture, Science and Education&quot; issued a report, The dangers of creationism in education, which states &quot;Creationism in any of its forms, such as 'intelligent design', is not based on facts, does not use any scientific reasoning and its contents are pathetically inadequate for science classes.&quot;231 In describing the dangers posed to education by teaching creationism, it described intelligent design as &quot;anti-science&quot; and involving &quot;blatant scientific fraud&quot; and &quot;intellectual deception&quot; that &quot;blurs the nature, objectives and limits of science&quot; and links it and other forms of creationism to denialism. On October 4, 2007, the Council of Europe's Parliamentary Assembly approved a resolution stating that schools should &quot;resist presentation of creationist ideas in any discipline other than religion&quot;, including &quot;intelligent design&quot; which it described as &quot;the latest, more refined version of creationism&quot;, &quot;presented in a more subtle way&quot;. The resolution emphasises that the aim of the report is not to question or to fight a belief, but to &quot;warn against certain tendencies to pass off a belief as science&quot;.
In the United Kingdom, public education includes Religious Education as a compulsory subject, and many &quot;faith schools&quot; that teach the ethos of particular denominations. When it was revealed that a group called Truth in Science had distributed DVDs produced by the Discovery Institute affiliate Illustra Media232 featuring Discovery Institute fellows making the case for design in nature,233 and claimed they were being used by 59 schools,234 the Department for Education and Skills (DfES) stated that &quot;Neither creationism nor intelligent design are taught as a subject in schools, and are not specified in the science curriculum&quot; (part of the National Curriculum which does not apply to independent schools or to Education in Scotland).235236 The DfES subsequently stated that &quot;Intelligent design is not a recognised scientific theory; therefore, it is not included in the science curriculum&quot;, but left the way open for it to be explored in religious education in relation to different beliefs, as part of a syllabus set by a local Standing Advisory Council on Religious Education.237 In 2006 the Qualifications and Curriculum Authority produced a Religious Education model unit in which pupils can learn about religious and nonreligious views about creationism, intelligent design and evolution by natural selection.238239
On June 25, 2007, the UK Government responded to an e-Petition by saying that creationism and intelligent design should not be taught as science, though teachers would be expected to answer pupils' questions within the standard framework of established scientific theories.240 Detailed government &quot;Creationism teaching guidance&quot; for schools in England was published on September 18, 2007.241 It states that &quot;Intelligent design lies wholly outside of science&quot;, has no underpinning scientific principles, or explanations, and is not accepted by the science community as a whole. Though it should not be taught as science, &quot;questions about creationism and intelligent design which arise in science lessons, for example as a result of media coverage, could provide the opportunity to explain or explore why they are not considered to be scientific theories and, in the right context, why evolution is considered to be a scientific theory&quot;. However, &quot;Teachers of subjects such as RE, history or citizenship may deal with creationism and intelligent design in their lessons&quot;.242
The British Centre for Science Education lobbying group has the goal of &quot;countering creationism within the UK&quot; and has been involved in government lobbying in the UK in this regard.243 However, in Northern Ireland the Democratic Unionist Party claims that the revised curriculum provides an opportunity for alternative theories to be taught, and has sought assurances that pupils will not lose marks if they give creationist or intelligent design answers to science questions.244 In Lisburn the DUP has arranged that the City Council will write to post primary schools asking what their plans are to develop teaching material in relation to &quot;creation, intelligent design and other theories of origin&quot;.245
Plans by Dutch Education Minister Maria van der Hoeven to &quot;stimulate an academic debate&quot; on the subject in 2005 caused a severe public backlash.246 After the 2007 elections she was succeeded by Ronald Plasterk, described as a &quot;molecular geneticist, staunch atheist and opponent of intelligent design&quot;.247 As a reaction on this situation in the Netherlands, in Belgium the President of the Flemish Catholic Educational Board (VSKO) Mieke Van Hecke declared that: &quot;Catholic scientists already accepted the theory of evolution for a long time and that intelligent design and creationism doesn't belong in Flemish Catholic schools. It's not the tasks of the politics to introduce new ideas, that's task and goal of science.&quot;248
Relation to Islam
Creationism has strong political support in many Islamic countries, and antievolutionary views are mainstream among academic theologians and scientists.249 In general, Muslim creationists have partnered with the Institute for Creation Research for ideas and materials which they adapted to their own theological positions. Similarly, some use was made of intelligent design antievolution resources. Muzaffar Iqbal, a notable Muslim in Canada, signed the Scientific Dissent list of the Discovery Institute.250 Ideas similar to intelligent design have been considered respected intellectual options among Muslims, and in Turkey many intelligent design books have been translated. In Istanbul in 2007, public meetings promoting intelligent design were sponsored by the local government,251 and David Berlinski of the Discovery Institute was the keynote speaker at a meeting in May 2007.252
Australia
The status of intelligent design in Australia is somewhat similar to that in the UK (see: Education in Australia). When the former Australian Federal Education Minister, Brendan Nelson, raised the notion of intelligent design being taught in science classes, the public outcry caused the minister to quickly concede that the correct forum for intelligent design, if it were to be taught, is in religious or philosophy classes.253
See also
Abiogenesis
Argument from poor design
Cosmological argument
Creation science
Flock of Dodos
Intelligent falling
List of works on intelligent design
Neo-Creationism
Old Earth creationism
Santorum Amendment
Watchmaker analogy
Notes
Further reading
Preview at Google Books
Preview at Google Books
Preview at Google Books
ID perspectives
Access Research Network
Design Inference: The website of William A. Dembski
Discovery Institute, Center for Science and Culture (Hub of the intelligent design movement)
EvolutionNews.org Discovery Institute website tracking media coverage of intelligent design.
ID The Future A multiple contributor weblog by Discovery Institute fellows.
Intelligent Design Network A nonprofit organization in Kansas to promote intelligent design
International Society for Complexity, Information, and Design (ISCID)
Uncommon Descent William Dembski's blog
Non-ID perspectives
Scientific American - 15 Answers to Creationist Questions
ACLU site on Intelligent Design
Intelligent Design?http://web.archive.org/web/20070620122151/http://www.naturalhistorymag.com/darwinanddesign.html special feature in the Natural History Magazine
Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy: Design Arguments for the Existence of God
National Center for Science Education What Is Intelligent Design Creationism?
Resolution from the American Association for the Advancement of Science
Science and Creationism: A View from the National Academy of Sciences Second Edition (1999)
Talk Origins Archive (Archive of the UseNet discussion group talk.origins)
139 page in-depth analysis of intelligent design, irreducible complexity, and the book Of Pandas and People by the Kitzmiller v. Dover Area School District judge
Kitzmiller: An Intelligent Ruling on 'Intelligent Design', JURIST
ID and Creationism
The Design Argument Elliott Sober, 2004.
Short discussion on Natural Knowledge and Natural Design as a contrast to Intelligent Designhttp://web.archive.org/web/20080307082606/http://richarddawkins.net/article,129,Natural-Knowledge-and-Natural-Design,Richard-Dawkins by Richard Dawkins
Media articles
Judgment Day: Intelligent Design on Trial A PBS-NOVA documentary on the Dover, PA Intelligent Design trial in 2005.(PBS)
Discovery's Creation An overview of the origin of the intelligent design movement. (Seattle Weekly)
Intelligent Design vs. Evolution debate between paleontologist Peter Ward and Stephen Meyer co-founder of the Discovery Institute
Intelligent Design Deja Vu What would &quot;intelligent design&quot; science classes look like? All we have to do is look inside some 19th century textbooks. (The Washington Post)
How the media have covered ID (Columbia Journalism Review)
Banned in biology class: intelligent design (Christian Science Monitor)
Devolution (The New Yorker)
The Evolution Debate (The New York Times)
Debating Evolution in the Classroom (NPR)
Darwin Victorious (TIME)
Intelligent Design: Scientific Inquiry or Religious Indoctrination? (Justice Talking)
Intelligent Judging&lt;U+2014&gt;Evolution in the Classroom and the Courtroom (New England Journal of Medicine)
af:Intelligente Ontwerp ar:&lt;U+062A&gt;&lt;U+0635&gt;&lt;U+0645&gt;&lt;U+064A&gt;&lt;U+0645&gt; &lt;U+0630&gt;&lt;U+0643&gt;&lt;U+064A&gt; az:A&lt;U+011F&gt;&lt;U+0131&gt;ll&lt;U+0131&gt; Layih&lt;U+0259&gt; bn:&lt;U+09AC&gt;&lt;U+09C1&gt;&lt;U+09A6&gt;&lt;U+09CD&gt;&lt;U+09A7&gt;&lt;U+09BF&gt;&lt;U+09A6&gt;&lt;U+09C0&gt;&lt;U+09AA&gt;&lt;U+09CD&gt;&lt;U+09A4&gt; &lt;U+0985&gt;&lt;U+09A8&gt;&lt;U+09C1&gt;&lt;U+0995&gt;&lt;U+09B2&gt;&lt;U+09CD&gt;&lt;U+09AA&gt; bg:&lt;U+0418&gt;&lt;U+043D&gt;&lt;U+0442&gt;&lt;U+0435&gt;&lt;U+043B&gt;&lt;U+0438&gt;&lt;U+0433&gt;&lt;U+0435&gt;&lt;U+043D&gt;&lt;U+0442&gt;&lt;U+0435&gt;&lt;U+043D&gt; &lt;U+0434&gt;&lt;U+0438&gt;&lt;U+0437&gt;&lt;U+0430&gt;&lt;U+0439&gt;&lt;U+043D&gt; ca:Disseny intel&lt;U+00B7&gt;ligent cs:Inteligentn&lt;U+00ED&gt; pl&lt;U+00E1&gt;n da:Intelligent design de:Intelligent Design es:Dise&lt;U+00F1&gt;o inteligente eo:Inteligenta dezajno eu:Diseinu adimentsua fa:&lt;U+0637&gt;&lt;U+0631&gt;&lt;U+0627&gt;&lt;U+062D&gt;&lt;U+06CC&gt; &lt;U+0647&gt;&lt;U+0648&gt;&lt;U+0634&gt;&lt;U+0645&gt;&lt;U+0646&gt;&lt;U+062F&gt; fr:Dessein intelligent ko:&lt;U+C9C0&gt;&lt;U+C801&gt; &lt;U+C124&gt;&lt;U+ACC4&gt; hr:Inteligentni dizajn id:Perancangan cerdas it:Disegno intelligente he:&lt;U+05EA&gt;&lt;U+05DB&gt;&lt;U+05E0&gt;&lt;U+05D5&gt;&lt;U+05DF&gt; &lt;U+05EA&gt;&lt;U+05D1&gt;&lt;U+05D5&gt;&lt;U+05E0&gt;&lt;U+05D9&gt; ka:&lt;U+10D2&gt;&lt;U+10DD&gt;&lt;U+10DC&gt;&lt;U+10D8&gt;&lt;U+10D4&gt;&lt;U+10E0&gt;&lt;U+10D8&gt; &lt;U+10E5&gt;&lt;U+10DB&gt;&lt;U+10DC&gt;&lt;U+10D8&gt;&lt;U+10DA&gt;&lt;U+10D4&gt;&lt;U+10D1&gt;&lt;U+10D0&gt; lv:Apzin&lt;U+0101&gt;ta rad&lt;U+012B&gt;&lt;U+0161&gt;ana lb:Intelligent Design lt:Protingas sumanymas hu:Intelligens tervez&lt;U+00E9&gt;s nl:Intelligent design ja:&lt;U+30A4&gt;&lt;U+30F3&gt;&lt;U+30C6&gt;&lt;U+30EA&gt;&lt;U+30B8&gt;&lt;U+30A7&gt;&lt;U+30F3&gt;&lt;U+30C8&gt;&lt;U+30FB&gt;&lt;U+30C7&gt;&lt;U+30B6&gt;&lt;U+30A4&gt;&lt;U+30F3&gt; no:Intelligent design pl:Inteligentny projekt pt:Design inteligente ro:Design inteligent ru:&lt;U+0420&gt;&lt;U+0430&gt;&lt;U+0437&gt;&lt;U+0443&gt;&lt;U+043C&gt;&lt;U+043D&gt;&lt;U+044B&gt;&lt;U+0439&gt; &lt;U+0437&gt;&lt;U+0430&gt;&lt;U+043C&gt;&lt;U+044B&gt;&lt;U+0441&gt;&lt;U+0435&gt;&lt;U+043B&gt; simple:Intelligent design sk:Inteligentn&lt;U+00FD&gt; dizajn sr:Inteligentni dizajn fi:&lt;U+00C4&gt;lyk&lt;U+00E4&gt;s suunnittelu sv:Intelligent design tr:Ak&lt;U+0131&gt;ll&lt;U+0131&gt; tasar&lt;U+0131&gt;m yi:&lt;U+05D0&gt;&lt;U+05D9&gt;&lt;U+05E0&gt;&lt;U+05D8&gt;&lt;U+05E2&gt;&lt;U+05DC&gt;&lt;U+05D9&gt;&lt;U+05D2&gt;&lt;U+05E2&gt;&lt;U+05E0&gt;&lt;U+05D8&gt;&lt;U+05E2&gt; &lt;U+05D0&gt;&lt;U+05D5&gt;&lt;U+05D9&gt;&lt;U+05E1&gt;&lt;U+05E4&gt;&lt;U+05DC&gt;&lt;U+05D0&gt;&lt;U+05E0&gt;&lt;U+05E2&gt;&lt;U+05D5&gt;&lt;U+05D5&gt;&lt;U+05E2&gt;&lt;U+05DF&gt; zh:&lt;U+667A&gt;&lt;U+80FD&gt;&lt;U+8BBE&gt;&lt;U+8BA1&gt;
  Category:Creationist objections to evolution Category:Denialism Category:Pseudoscience Category:Arguments for the existence of God
↩
↩
, Context pg. 32 ff, citing ↩
&quot;ID is not a new scientific argument, but is rather an old religious argument for the existence of God. He traced this argument back to at least Thomas Aquinas in the 13th century, who framed the argument as a syllogism: Wherever complex design exists, there must have been a designer; nature is complex; therefore nature must have had an intelligent designer.&quot; &quot;This argument for the existence of God was advanced early in the 19th century by Reverend Paley&quot; (the teleological argument) &quot;The only apparent difference between the argument made by Paley and the argument for ID, as expressed by defense expert witnesses Behe and Minnich, is that ID's 'official position' does not acknowledge that the designer is God.&quot; , Ruling, p. 24.↩
↩
&quot;the writings of leading ID proponents reveal that the designer postulated by their argument is the God of Christianity&quot;. , Ruling p. 26. A selection of writings and quotes of intelligent design supporters demonstrating this identification of the Christian God with the intelligent designer are found in the pdf Horse's Mouthhttp://web.archive.org/web/20080627021627/http://home.kc.rr.com/bnpndxtr/download/HorsesMouth-BP007.pdf (PDF) by Brian Poindexter, dated 2003.↩
William A. Dembski, when asked in an interview whether his research concluded that God is the Intelligent Designer, stated &quot;I believe God created the world for a purpose. The Designer of intelligent design is, ultimately, the Christian God&quot;. ↩
↩
See: 1) List of scientific societies explicitly rejecting intelligent design 2) Kitzmiller v. Dover page 83. 3) The Discovery Institute's A Scientific Dissent From Darwinism petition begun in 2001 has been signed by &quot;over 700 scientists&quot; as of August 20, 2006. A four day A Scientific Support for Darwinism petition gained 7733 signatories from scientists opposing ID. The AAAS, the largest association of scientists in the U.S., has 120,000 members, and firmly rejects ID. More than 70,000 Australian scientists and educators condemn teaching of intelligent design in school science classes List of statements from scientific professional organizations on the status intelligent design and other forms of creationism. According to The New York Times &quot;There is no credible scientific challenge to the theory of evolution as an explanation for the complexity and diversity of life on earth&quot;. ↩
↩
↩
↩
, pp. 31 &lt;U+2013&gt; 33.↩
, Conclusion of Ruling.↩
↩
↩
Aristotle, Metaphysics Bk. 12↩
Linda Trinkaus Zagzebski (2006). The Philosophy of Religion: An Historical Introduction, 31; Cicero, De Natura Deorum, Book I, 36&lt;U+2013&gt;37, Latin Library.↩
Thomas Aquinas, Summa Theologiae &quot;Thomas Aquinas' 'Five Ways' (archive link)&quot; in faithnet.org.uk.↩
William Paley, Natural Theology: or, Evidences of the Existence and Attributes of the Deity, 1809, London, Twelfth Edition.↩
↩
↩
Forrest, Barbara. Know Your Creationists: Know Your Allies↩
↩
↩
&quot;the writings of leading ID proponents reveal that the designer postulated by their argument is the God of Christianity&quot;. , Ruling p. 26. A selection of writings and quotes of intelligent design supporters demonstrating this are found in Horse's Mouthhttp://web.archive.org/web/20080627021627/http://home.kc.rr.com/bnpndxtr/download/HorsesMouth-BP007.pdf (PDF) by Brian Poindexter, dated 2003.↩
William A. Dembski, when asked in an interview whether his research concluded that God is the Intelligent Designer, stated &quot;I believe God created the world for a purpose. The Designer of intelligent design is, ultimately, the Christian God&quot;. ↩
Dembski: &quot;Intelligent design is just the Logos theology of John's Gospel restated in the idiom of information theory,&quot; Touchstone Magazine. Volume 12, Issue4: July/August, 1999↩
Phillip Johnson: &quot;Our strategy has been to change the subject a bit so that we can get the issue of Intelligent Design, which really means the reality of God, before the academic world and into the schools.&quot; Johnson 2004. Christianity.ca. Let's Be Intelligent About Darwinhttp://web.archive.org/web/20070608233455/http://www.christianity.ca/news/social-issues/2004/03.001.html. &quot;This isn't really, and never has been a debate about science. It's about religion and philosophy.&quot; Johnson 1996. World Magazine. Witnesses For The Prosecution. &quot;So the question is: &quot;How to win?&quot; That's when I began to develop what you now see full-fledged in the &quot;wedge&quot; strategy: &quot;Stick with the most important thing&quot;&lt;U+2014&gt;the mechanism and the building up of information. Get the Bible and the Book of Genesis out of the debate because you do not want to raise the so-called Bible-science dichotomy. Phrase the argument in such a way that you can get it heard in the secular academy and in a way that tends to unify the religious dissenters. That means concentrating on, &quot;Do you need a Creator to do the creating, or can nature do it on its own?&quot; and refusing to get sidetracked onto other issues, which people are always trying to do.&quot; Johnson 2000. Touchstone magazine. ↩
↩
Dove, Patrick Edward, The theory of human progression, and natural probability of a reign of justice. London, Johnstone &amp; Hunter, 1850. LC 08031381 &quot;Intelligence-Intelligent Design&quot;.↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
 *↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
Behe, Michael (1997): Molecular Machines: Experimental Support for the Design Inference 1↩
Irreducible complexity of these examples is disputed; see Kitzmiller, pp. 76&lt;U+2013&gt;78, and Ken Miller Webcast↩
The Collapse of &quot;Irreducible Complexity&quot; Kenneth R. Miller Brown University 2↩
John H. McDonald's &quot;reducibly complex mousetrap&quot;↩
David Ussery, &quot;A Biochemist's Response to 'The Biochemical Challenge to Evolution'&quot;↩
For example, Bridgham et al. showed that gradual evolutionary mechanisms can produce complex protein-protein interaction systems from simpler precursors. ↩
 This article draws from the following exchange of letters in which Behe admits to sloppy prose and non-logical proof: ↩
, p. 64.↩
Dembski. Intelligent Design, p. 47↩
↩
Some of Dembski's responses to assertions of specified complexity being a tautology can be found at ↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
The Panda's Thumb. review of The Privileged Planet↩
Is The Universe Fine-Tuned For Us? Victor J. Stenger. University of Colorado. (PDF file)↩
↩
↩
See, e.g., ↩
 (Also available from the Discovery Institute)↩
↩
↩
↩
http://web.archive.org/web/20060618235930/http://pondside.uchicago.edu/cluster/pdf/coyne/New_Republic_ID.pdf↩
↩
IDEA &quot;One need not fully understand the origin or identity of the designer to determine that an object was designed. Thus, this question is essentially irrelevant to intelligent design theory, which merely seeks to detect if an object was designed ... Intelligent design theory cannot address the identity or origin of the designer&lt;U+2014&gt;it is a philosophical / religious question that lies outside the domain of scientific inquiry. Christianity postulates the religious answer to this question that the designer is God who by definition is eternally existent and has no origin. There is no logical philosophical impossibility with this being the case (akin to Aristotle's 'unmoved mover') as a religious answer to the origin of the designer...&quot; FAQ: Who designed the designer? FAQ: Who designed the designer?↩
↩
↩
See, e.g., ; ↩
↩
↩
*
*Conclusion of Kitzmiller v. Dover Area School District Ruling↩
Wise, D.U., 2001, Creationism's Propaganda Assault on Deep Time and Evolution, Journal of Geoscience Education, v. 49, n. 1, p. 30&lt;U+2013&gt;35.↩
↩
↩
; ↩
; ↩
; ↩
&quot;The social consequences of materialism have been devastating. As symptoms, those consequences are certainly worth treating. However, we are convinced that in order to defeat materialism, we must cut it off at its source. That source is scientific materialism. This is precisely our strategy. If we view the predominant materialistic science as a giant tree, our strategy is intended to function as a 'wedge' that, while relatively small, can split the trunk when applied at its weakest points. The very beginning of this strategy, the 'thin edge of the wedge,' was Phillip Johnson's critique of Darwinism begun in 1991 in Darwinism on Trial, and continued in Reason in the Balance and Defeating Darwinism by Opening Minds. Michael Behe's highly successful Darwin's Black Box followed Johnson's work. We are building on this momentum, broadening the wedge with a positive scientific alternative to materialistic scientific theories, which has come to be called the theory of intelligent design (ID). Design theory promises to reverse the stifling dominance of the materialist worldview, and to replace it with a science consonant with Christian and theistic convictions&quot;. Wedge Document Discovery Institute, 1999. (PDF file)↩
Wedge Document (PDF) Discovery Institute, 1999.↩
&quot;I have built an intellectual movement in the universities and churches that we call The Wedge, which is devoted to scholarship and writing that furthers this program of questioning the materialistic basis of science. [...] Now the way that I see the logic of our movement going is like this. The first thing you understand is that the Darwinian theory isn't true. It's falsified by all of the evidence and the logic is terrible. When you realize that, the next question that occurs to you is, well, where might you get the truth? [...] I start with John 1:1. In the beginning was the word. In the beginning was intelligence, purpose, and wisdom. The Bible had that right. And the materialist scientists are deluding themselves.&quot; Johnson 1999. Reclaiming America for Christ Conference. How the Evolution Debate Can Be Won↩
 ↩
↩
&quot;...intelligent design does not address metaphysical and religious questions such as the nature or identity of the designer,&quot; and &quot;...the nature, moral character and purposes of this intelligence lie beyond the competence of science and must be left to religion and philosophy&quot;. In: ↩
 &quot;Intelligent Design is an intellectual movement, and the Wedge strategy stops working when we are seen as just another way of packaging the Christian evangelical message. [...] The evangelists do what they do very well, and I hope our work opens up for them some doors that have been closed&quot;.↩
 &quot;...the first thing that has to be done is to get the Bible out of the discussion. ...This is not to say that the biblical issues are unimportant; the point is rather that the time to address them will be after we have separated materialist prejudice from scientific fact&quot;. The Wedge↩
William Dembski, 1998. The Design Inference.↩
Dembski, 1999. Intelligent Design: The Bridge Between Science and Theology, p. 210.↩
↩
Barbara Forrest. Expert Testimony. Kitzmiller v. Dover Area School District trial transcript, Day 6 (October 5) &quot;What I am talking about is the essence of intelligent design, and the essence of it is theistic realism as defined by Professor Johnson. Now that stands on its own quite apart from what their motives are. I'm also talking about the definition of intelligent design by Dr. Dembski as the Logos theology of John's Gospel. That stands on its own. [...] Intelligent design, as it is understood by the proponents that we are discussing today, does involve a supernatural creator, and that is my objection. And I am objecting to it as they have defined it, as Professor Johnson has defined intelligent design, and as Dr. Dembski has defined intelligent design. And both of those are basically religious. They involve the supernatural&quot;.↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
http://web.archive.org/web/20080327041611/http://csicop.org/doubtandabout/polling/↩
↩
According to the poll, 18% of the physicians believed that God created humans exactly as they appear today. Another 42% believed that God initiated and guided an evolutionary process that has led to current human beings. The poll also found that &quot;an overwhelming majority of Jewish doctors (83%) and half of Catholic doctors (51%) believe that intelligent design is simply &quot;a religiously inspired pseudo-science rather than a legitimate scientific speculation&quot;. The poll also found that &quot;more than half of Protestant doctors (63%) believe that intelligent design is a &quot;legitimate scientific speculation&quot;.
↩
Gallup, &quot;Evolution, creationism, intelligent design,&quot;. Retrieved 24 August 2010.↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
 Joint statement issued by the national science academies of 67 countries, including the United Kingdom's Royal Society.↩
↩
↩
&lt;U+2022&gt; 
&lt;U+2022&gt; 
&lt;U+2022&gt; ↩
&quot;ID is not a new scientific argument, but is rather an old religious argument for the existence of God. He traced this argument back to at least Thomas Aquinas in the 13th century, who framed the argument as a syllogism: Wherever complex design exists, there must have been a designer; nature is complex; therefore nature must have had an intelligent designer.&quot; &quot;This argument for the existence of God was advanced early in the 19th century by Reverend Paley&quot; (the teleological argument) &quot;The only apparent difference between the argument made by Paley and the argument for ID, as expressed by defense expert witnesses Behe and Minnich, is that ID's 'official position' does not acknowledge that the designer is God.&quot; , Ruling, p. 24.↩
↩
[Johnson positions himself as a &quot;theistic realist&quot; against &quot;methodological naturalism&quot;.]↩
↩
See, for instance: http://web.archive.org/web/20080114094157/http://www.utexas.edu/cola/depts/philosophy/faculty/koons/ntse/papers/Vuletic.html↩
↩
&quot;Top questions about intelligent design&quot;, Discovery Institute. Retrieved August 27, 2010.↩
↩
http://web.archive.org/web/20070608233455/http://www.christianity.ca/news/social-issues/2004/03.001.html↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
Natan Slifkin (2006). The Challenge of Creation (New York: Yashar Books) 288 ff.↩
↩
↩
↩
 Discusses principles of induction, deduction and probability related to the expectation of consistency, testability, and multiple observations. Chapter 8 discusses parsimony (Occam's razor)↩
 Discusses the scientific method, including the principles of falsifiability, testability, progressive development of theory, dynamic self-correcting of hypotheses, and parsimony, or &quot;Occam's razor&quot;.↩
, 4: whether ID is science. The ruling discusses central aspects of expectations in the scientific community that a scientific theory be testable, dynamic, correctible, progressive, based upon multiple observations, and provisional,↩
See, e.g., ↩
Intelligent design fails to pass Occam's razor. Adding entities (an intelligent agent, a designer) to the equation is not strictly necessary to explain events. See, e.g., ↩
See, e.g., ↩
The designer is not falsifiable, since its existence is typically asserted without sufficient conditions to allow a falsifying observation. The designer being beyond the realm of the observable, claims about its existence can be neither supported nor undermined by observation, making intelligent design and the argument from design analytic a posteriori arguments. See, e.g.,  Ruling, p. 22 and p. 77.↩
That intelligent design is not empirically testable stems from the fact that it violates a basic premise of science, naturalism. See, e.g.,  Ruling, p. 22 and p. 66.↩
Intelligent design professes to offer an answer that does not need to be defined or explained, the intelligent agent, designer. By asserting a conclusion that cannot be accounted for scientifically, the designer, intelligent design cannot be sustained by any further explanation, and objections raised to those who accept intelligent design make little headway. Thus intelligent design is not a provisional assessment of data which can change when new information is discovered. Once it is claimed that a conclusion that need not be accounted for has been established, there is simply no possibility of future correction. The idea of the progressive growth of scientific ideas is required to explain previous data and any previously unexplainable data. See, e.g., the brief explanation in  p. 66.↩
 The September 2005 statement by 38 Nobel laureates stated that: &quot;Intelligent design is fundamentally unscientific; it cannot be tested as scientific theory because its central conclusion is based on belief in the intervention of a supernatural agent&quot;.↩
 The October 2005 statement, by a coalition representing more than 70,000 Australian scientists and science teachers said: &quot;intelligent design is not science&quot; and called on &quot;all schools not to teach Intelligent Design (ID) as science, because it fails to qualify on every count as a scientific theory&quot;.↩
↩
Nagel, Thomas. &quot;Public Education and Intelligent Design&quot;, Philosophy and Public Affairs, Vol. 36, no. 2, 2008, pp. 196–197.↩
, 4. Whether ID is Science, p. 87↩
Free Speech on Evolution Campaign Main Page Discovery Institute, Center for Science and Culture.↩
↩
Skeptic: eSkeptic: Thursday, April 17th, 2008↩
↩
↩
↩
The Sternberg peer review controversy and several similar academic disputes are the subject of the 2008 documentary &quot;Expelled: No Intelligence Allowed&quot;.↩
↩
↩
Ruling, Kitzmiller v. Dover Area School District 4: whether ID is science↩
↩
 4: whether ID is science↩
↩
Kitzmiller v. Dover Area School District'', October 19, 2005, AM session Kitzmiller Testimony, Behe↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
&quot;For human artifacts, we know the designer's identity, human, and the mechanism of design, as we have experience based upon empirical evidence that humans can make such things, as well as many other attributes including the designer's abilities, needs, and desires. With ID, proponents assert that they refuse to propose hypotheses on the designer's identity, do not propose a mechanism, and the designer, he/she/it/they, has never been seen. In that vein, defense expert Professor Minnich agreed that in the case of human artifacts and objects, we know the identity and capacities of the human designer, but we do not know any of those attributes for the designer of biological life. In addition, Professor Behe agreed that for the design of human artifacts, we know the designer and its attributes and we have a baseline for human design that does not exist for design of biological systems. Professor Behe's only response to these seemingly insurmountable points of disanalogy was that the inference still works in science fiction movies&quot;.&lt;U+2014&gt;, p. 81↩
http://web.archive.org/web/20011018142820/http://www.csicop.org/si/2001-03/intelligent-design.html↩
↩
↩
See, for instance: ↩
Intelligent Design on Trial: Kitzmiller v. Dover. National Center for Science Education. October 17th, 2008↩
↩
http://web.archive.org/web/20070928055938/http://pewforum.org/news/display.php?NewsID=5945↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
*↩
↩
↩
↩
De Morgen, May 23, 2005↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
