Wife selling was the practice of a husband selling his wife, in some cases to a new husband. There was an English custom and a Chinese custom, among others.
History and practice
England
The English custom of wife selling began in the late 17th century when divorce was a practical impossibility for all but the very wealthiest. After parading his wife with a halter around her neck, arm, or waist, a husband would publicly auction her to the highest bidder. Although the custom had no basis in law and frequently resulted in prosecution, particularly from the mid-19th century onwards, the attitude of the authorities was equivocal. At least one early 19th-century magistrate is on record as stating that he did not believe he had the right to prevent wife sales, and there were cases of local Poor Law Commissioners forcing husbands to sell their wives, rather than having to maintain the family in workhouses. The English custom of wife selling spread to Wales, Scotland, Australia,1 and the United States before dying out in the early 20th century.
China
The Chinese custom of wife selling or selling a divorce () has a long history, spanning both the Imperial and Modern eras.
The earliest documentation of the practice appears in Yuan Dynasty law dating to the 14th century. At that time, two types of wife selling were recognized, both considered illegal. The first type was when a husband sold his wife to a man with whom she had been committing adultery. The second type was when a husband sold his wife because she had betrayed him or because they were no longer able to get along. During the Ming Dynasty, it was gradually established that only wife selling which was motivated by adultery should be punished. By 1568, wife selling was explicitly authorized by the law in several circumstances. Authorized wife selling was preserved by Qing Dynasty lawmakers, as was the prohibition against selling a wife to her lover.2
Contemporary wife selling in China
As the Chinese Communist Party came to power in 19493, wife selling was prohibited and the government took measures to eradicate the practice.4 During the famines caused by the Great Leap Forward wife selling occurred in many of the poorer areas.5 As of 1997, the custom was still occasionally reported in some rural areas of the country.6
From 1991 to 1996 Chinese police rescued upwards of 88,000 women and children who had been sold into marriage and slavery, and the Chinese government claims that 143,000 traffickers involved were caught and prosecuted. Some human rights groups state that the figures are not correct and that the real number of abducted women are higher. Bay Fang and Mark Leong reported in U.S. News &amp; World Report that &quot;the government sees the commerce in wives as a shameful problem, it has only in recent years begun to provide any statistics, and it tries to put the focus on the women who have been saved rather than on the continuing trade.&quot; As women leave rural areas to find work in cities, they are considered more vulnerable to being &quot;tricked or forced into becoming chattel for men desperate for wives.&quot; The Chinese Academy of Social Sciences estimated that in 1998 there were 120 men for every 100 women, with imbalances in rural areas being about 130 males for everyone 100 females, triggered by China's traditional preference for male children. This gender imbalance co-contributes to the continuance of wife selling alongside women moving from rural communities. The increase in the cost of dowries are also a contributing factor leading men to buy women for wives. Human Rights in China states that it is more affordable for a man to buy a wife from a trafficker for 2,000 to 4,000 yuan than to pay a traditional dowry, which often runs upwards of 10,000 yuan. For the average urban worker, wife selling is an affordable option when in 1998 China urban workers make approximately $60 a month.7
Chinese women who are bought as wives who bear children are more prone to staying within the marriage. Fang Yuzhu of the China Women's Federation credits it with a &quot;strong sense of duty&quot; that Chinese women have, and the idea that it is shameful to leave their husband. Yuzhu also credits that some women might consider their forced marriage a better option to the life of poverty and hard labor they would be subject to upon returning home or the idea that some women may not feel the can find another husband, since they &quot;have already been with one &quot;husband.&quot;&quot;8
India
In rural India, in the late 20th century, wives have been sold, including in the region of Bundelkhand. When loans from wealthy men, as &quot;unofficial lenders&quot;,9 have high interest and the interest accumulates, &quot;lenders demand payment. Some farmers .... say because of years of little rain and bad harvests they are forced to give money lenders whatever they ask for. Sometimes that includes their wives.&quot;10 Cases may be reported to the police. However, &quot;Ranjana Kumari with India's Center for Social Research .... says ... there is little support for women in India who have the courage to file a case with authorities.... '[T]he women themselves tend to withdraw these cases.'&quot;11 The Indian government in 1998 said in a report, according to CNN, &quot;the region is prone to what it calls 'atrocities,' including the buying and selling of women.&quot;12 &quot;Social workers say this isn't just about poverty, but also an indication of the low social status of women in poverty-stricken areas such as Bundelkhand.&quot;13 While &quot;the status of women and girls ... [is] low ...., attitudes are slowly beginning to change, Kumari says.&quot;14 The frequency of such cases is unknown.15
Other cultures
Wife selling occurred in Europe in addition to that in Britain.16 In Hungary, in 1114, the Synod of Gran said, &quot;When a wife of noble birth or aristocracy has left her husband for the third time, she receives mercy, but when she is from the common people, she is sold.&quot;17 Germans &quot;considered the wife as negotiable property ... [and] sold them to the conquering Romans&quot;.18
Criticism
A wife being subject to sale was a consequence of her being a man's property, according to sociologist Alvin John Schmidt.19 The religious Commandment against coveting one's neighbor's wife has as part of its basis that &quot;the wife is definitely seen as property&quot;, wrote Schmidt.20 Christians and earlier Hebrews were, according to Schmidt, influenced by the belief that &quot;woman [was] ... unequal to man&quot;,21 producing &quot;sexist theology&quot;.22 Schmidt argued that teachers of Judeo-Christian tradition who teach on this Commandment &quot;without drawing attention to the property concept of woman&quot;23 &quot;might [be] ... unknowingly contributing to sexual inequality.&quot;24 Inequality and inferiority are, according to Schmidt, &quot;negative&quot;.25
Wife selling was criticized by Pope Gregory VII in the 11th century,26 although at other times the Christian church supported it.27
See also
Bride-buying
Coverture
References
Category:Divorce Category:Family law Category:Medieval law Category:Social history of China Category:Chinese women Category:Indian women Category:12th century in Hungary Category:Social history of Germany Category:Judeo-Christian topics Category:11th-century Roman Catholicism Category:Household behavior and family economics Category:Medieval women Category:Misogyny
Valenze, Deborah M., The Social Life of Money in the English Past (Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2006 (ISBN-13 978-0-521-61780-2)), p. 249 &amp; probably n. 83 (n. omitted) (author prof. history, Barnard Coll.), n. 83 citing Ihde, Erin, &quot;So Gross a Violation of Decency&quot;: A Note on Wife Sales in Colonial Australia, in Journal of the Royal Australian Historical Society, vol. 84, Jun., 1998, pp. 26&lt;U+2013&gt;27, &amp; Hughes, Robert, The Fatal Shore: An Epic of Australia's Founding (N.Y., no publisher cited: 1986), pp. 244&lt;U+2013&gt;264.↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
Sidner, Sara, Farmers Sell Wives to Pay Debts in Rural India, CNN, Oct. 22, 2009, as accessed Oct. 8, 2011.↩
Sidner, Sara, Farmers Sell Wives to Pay Debts in Rural India, CNN, Oct. 22, 2009, p. 2, as accessed Oct. 8, 2011.↩
Valenze, Deborah M., The Social Life of Money in the English Past, op. cit., p. 250.↩
Schmidt, Alvin John, Veiled and Silenced: How Culture Shaped Sexist Theology (Macon, Ga.: Mercer Univ. Press, 1989 (pbk. ISBN 0-86554-327-5 &amp; casebound ISBN 0-86554-329-1)), p. 127 &amp; n. 28 (n. omitted) (author sociologist), n. 28 citing the Synod's 53rd canon &amp; von Hefele, Carl Joseph, Conciliengeschichte, vol. 5 (Freiburg: Herder'sche Verlagshandlung, 1886), p. 324.↩
Schmidt, Alvin John, Veiled and Silenced, op. cit., p. 127 &amp; n. 29, citing Bruder, Reinhold, Die Germanische Frau im Lichte der Runeninschriften und der Antiken Historiographie (Berlin: Walter de Gruyter, 1974).↩
Schmidt, Alvin John, Veiled and Silenced, op. cit., p. 124 and see pp. 124&lt;U+2013&gt;129.↩
Schmidt, Alvin John, Veiled and Silenced, op. cit., p. 126.↩
Schmidt, Alvin John, Veiled and Silenced, op. cit., pp. 128&lt;U+2013&gt;129 (quoting p. 129).↩
Schmidt, Alvin John, Veiled and Silenced, op. cit., p. 129 (sexism defined by author as &quot;an attitude, belief, or practice that subordinates an individual or group on the basis of sex&quot;, per id., p. xvii (Introduction)).↩
Schmidt, Alvin John, Veiled and Silenced, op. cit., p. xiv and see p. xv (both in Introduction).↩
Schmidt, Alvin John, Veiled and Silenced, op. cit., p. 128 &amp; n. 34, citing von Hefele, Carl Joseph, Conciliengeschichte, op. cit., p. 19.↩
Schmidt, Alvin John, Veiled and Silenced, op. cit., p. 128 &amp; nn. 35&lt;U+2013&gt;36, citing Menefee, Samuel Pyeatt, Wives for Sale (N.Y.: St. Martin's Press, 1981), pp. 56 &amp; 140.↩
