Whatever Happened to Sarah Jane? is the fifth story of the British science fiction television series The Sarah Jane Adventures. It forms the seventh and eighth episodes of the show's first series. The first episode was aired on the CBBC channel on 29 October 2007, and the second on 5 November.
Synopsis
Maria Jackson wakes up one morning to find that seemingly no one has heard of Sarah Jane or Luke Smith. Maria discovers that a woman called Andrea Yates has taken Sarah Jane's place.1
Plot
Sarah Jane tells Maria and Luke about a meteorite on course with Earth but reassures them that Mr Smith will be able to deflect it the following day. Sarah Jane gives Maria an alien puzzle box to cheer her up; she falls asleep that night holding it, as a mysterious cloaked figure approaches Sarah Jane's house. The next day, Maria finds that Sarah Jane, Luke and Mr. Smith have all disappeared, and she alone remembers them. A woman named Andrea Yates is living in Sarah Jane's house.
Investigating, Maria finds a 1964 newspaper report stating that a thirteen-year-old Sarah Jane Smith drowned after falling from a pier, where she was playing with her friend Andrea Yates. As Maria watches, the names of the deceased and the survivor keep switching. When Maria confronts Andrea, the panic stricken woman rushes to her attic and finds a second puzzle box. The cloaked figure appears and offers to make Maria disappear. After Andrea accepts, he dispatches a Graske, who captures Maria just after Alan picks up the first puzzle box. When Chrissie comes round he discovers his ex-wife cannot remember their daughter. Meanwhile Maria escapes from the Graske and finds herself on a beach promenade near two girls. They introduce themselves as Andrea Yates and Sarah Jane Smith.
After failing to dissuade Andrea from taking Sarah Jane to the pier, Maria is recaptured and taken to join Sarah Jane on a white misty plain, limbo. The mysterious figure explains he has removed Sarah Jane from Earth's timeline so the meteorite will destroy it and create the chaos on which he feeds; the Doctor will be his next target.
Alan accompanies Chrissie to Andrea's birthday party. Remembering Maria's suspicions, he questions Andrea, who takes him to the attic and tearfully reveals the truth. When she fell off the pier and Sarah Jane was unable to save her, a voice offered to switch the girls' places, and she accepted. The figure appeared and gave her the puzzle box, then removed himself from Andrea's memory; Maria&lt;U+2019&gt;s questions made Andrea remember. Alan is now chased into the street by the Graske but knocks it down and ties it up, then uses its device to bring back Maria.
They return to the attic, where Sarah Jane appears in the mirror and explains to Andrea that witnessing her death gave her the resolve to fight pointless deaths herself. When the figure reappears (called &lt;U+201C&gt;the Trickster&lt;U+201D&gt; by Alan), Andrea explains she has changed her mind about the deal and throws her puzzle box at the mirror, smashing both. Back in 1964 Andrea falls to her death, while Sarah and Luke reappear in the attic and activate Mr Smith. The party guests, including Clyde and Chrissie, have learnt from television news about the incoming meteorite, and are relieved to see it suddenly diverted from its fall. The episode ends with Alan demanding an explanation of his daughter&lt;U+2019&gt;s involvement with aliens and supercomputers.
Continuity
The Graske featured in this episode, hired (or possibly enslaved) to kidnap Maria. They also featured in the interactive episode of Doctor Who, &quot;Attack of the Graske&quot;. Sarah states that there was Graske activity on Earth a couple of years ago, possibly referring to that episode.
Sarah mentions previous times she saved the Earth and thwarted alien invasions, including the Bane (&quot;Invasion of the Bane&quot;), the Slitheen (Revenge of the Slitheen) and the Gorgons (Eye of the Gorgon). She also mentions that she helped defeat the Patriachs of the Tin Vagabond. The Church of the Tin Vagabond was previously mentioned in the 2006 Doctor Who episode, &quot;The Satan Pit&quot;.
Sarah Jane has to move a book about UNIT to get to the puzzle box.
The Trickster threatens the Doctor when in limbo. This is the second time that he has been explicitly named in the series, the first being in Revenge of the Slitheen. The Trickster makes good on this threat in the Doctor Who episode &quot;Turn Left&quot;, when a creature from &quot;[his] brigade&quot; assaults Donna Noble.
The Trickster's line, &quot;Waking or sleeping, ...&quot; is the same as similar comments made by the Black Guardian in Mawdryn Undead.
Outside references
Clyde describes the meteor coming to earth like something out of the 1998 film Armageddon.
Sarah Jane says when they are not in time they are in limbo; this is a Roman Catholic idea meaning 'the edge of hell'.
When questioned about Maria, Andrea mentions &quot;Ave Maria&quot; and Maria Callas.
As in many previous Doctor Who episodes, BBC News 24 releases 'Breaking News' during the serial, although again without the BBC logo present.
The fictional plants species Triffid is mentioned.
The popular song &quot;(There's) Always Something There to Remind Me&quot; is heard at Andrea's party.
The Kinks song &quot;You Really Got Me&quot; is heard on a radio when Maria arrives in the 1960s.
Cast notes
Jane Asher previously portrayed the Doctor's granddaughter Susan Foreman in the 1994 Radio 4 spoof Whatever Happened to Susan Foreman.
Paul Marc Davis previously appeared as the Futurekind Chieftain in the Doctor Who 2007 episode &quot;Utopia&quot;, and later as the Cowled Leader in the 2008 Torchwood episode &quot;Exit Wounds&quot;.
Novelisation
A novelisation will be released in 2008.
Reception
The story received several positive reviews. Mark Wright, writing on The Stage's &quot;TV Today&quot; blog, stated that the series, while usually &quot;wholly satisfying and entertaining&quot;, &quot;achieves true greatness&quot; with the first part of Whatever Happened to Sarah Jane? He called the episode &quot;scary as hell ... but with that essential lightness of touch that has typified the show from the start&quot;.2 Alisdair Stuart praised the acting of Jane Asher, Joseph Millson and Yasmin Paige; he regarded Paige's prominence as compensating for her relative lack of screen time in Warriors of Kudlak. Stuart summed up Whatever Happened to Sarah Jane? as &quot;the darkest, most ambitious and most effective Sarah Jane story to date&quot; and &quot;one of the best New Who stories to date&quot;.3 Andrea Mullaney in The Scotsman also commended the &quot;young actors&quot;, while calling attention to a &quot;gentle theme&quot; in the story of &quot;ageing and what we leave behind&quot;.4
The second part of the story received the most viewers of any programme ever broadcast on the CBBC Channel.5
References
External links
Sarah Jane Adventures homepage
Category:The Sarah Jane Adventures episodes Category:2007 television episodes
↩
↩
↩
↩
The Doctor Who News Page↩
