 This is a complete listing of cast members from the long-running animated comedy television series The Simpsons. Each of the actors has voiced numerous one-time, background characters, but only the notable characters that the actors voice are listed. Characters from The Simpsons Movie are also not included.
The principal cast consists of Dan Castellaneta, Julie Kavner, Nancy Cartwright, Yeardley Smith, Hank Azaria and Harry Shearer. Castellaneta and Kavner were asked to voice the lead roles of Homer and Marge Simpson as they were regular cast members of The Tracey Ullman Show on which The Simpsons shorts appeared.1 Cartwright auditioned for the part of Lisa, but felt her voice was better suited to Bart, and so was given that role.2 Smith was brought in to voice Lisa instead.3 When the show was commissioned for a full half-hour series, Shearer joined the cast and performed multiple roles. Groening and Sam Simon asked Shearer to join the cast as they were fans of his radio show.4 Azaria was only a guest actor in the first season, but became permanent in season two.5 He first appeared in &quot;Some Enchanted Evening&quot;, re-recording Christopher Collins's lines as Moe Szyslak. As he joined later than the rest of the cast, Groening still considers Azaria the &quot;new guy.&quot;6 Tress MacNeille, Pamela Hayden, Maggie Roswell, Russi Taylor, Marcia Wallace, Marcia Mitzman Gaven and Karl Wiedergott have appeared as supporting cast. Repeat guest cast members include Albert Brooks, Phil Hartman, Jon Lovitz, Joe Mantegna and Kelsey Grammer.7
With one exception, episode credits list only the voice actors, and not the characters they voice. Both Fox and the production crew wanted to keep their identities secret during the early seasons and, therefore, closed most of the recording sessions while refusing to publish photos of the recording artists.8 However, the network eventually revealed which roles each actor performed in the episode &quot;Old Money&quot;, because the producers said the voice actors should receive credit for their work.9 With the exception of Shearer, every main cast member has won an Emmy for Outstanding Voice-Over Performance.10 Azaria and Castellaneta have both won three, while Kavner, Cartwright, Smith, Wallace, Grammer and guest star Jackie Mason have each won one.11
Regular cast
Nancy Cartwright is best known for voicing Bart Simpson.
Yeardley Smith provides the voice of Lisa Simpson only.
Harry Shearer is the only principal cast member who has not won an Emmy Award for Outstanding Voice-Over Performance.
Marcia Wallace appears regularly as Edna Krabappel.
Kelsey Grammer voices Sideshow Bob.
Jon Lovitz has provided several guest voices.
Jan Hooks plays Manjula Nahasapeemapetilon.
Maurice LaMarche has appeared in several minor roles.
Actor
Character(s)
Dan Castellaneta
Homer Simpson
Abraham Simpson
Krusty the Clown
Barney Gumble
Groundskeeper Willie
Mayor Quimby
Hans Moleman
Sideshow Mel
Itchy
Kodos
Gil Gunderson
Squeaky Voiced Teen
Blue-Haired Lawyer
Rich Texan
Louie
Bill
Arnie Pie
Mr. Teeny
Yes Guy
Scott Christian
Assistant Superintendent Leopold
Rabbi Krustofski
Charlie
Gary
Santa's Little Helper
Frankie the Squealer
Julie Kavner
Marge Simpson
Patty Bouvier
Selma Bouvier
Jacqueline Bouvier
Nancy Cartwright
Bart Simpson
Nelson Muntz
Todd Flanders
Ralph Wiggum
Kearney
Database
Yeardley Smith
Lisa Simpson
Hank Azaria
Apu Nahasapeemapetilon
Moe Szyslak
Clancy Wiggum
Comic Book Guy
Lou
Carl Carlson
Dr. Nick Riviera
Snake Jailbird
Professor Frink
Kirk Van Houten
Luigi Risotto
Bumblebee Man
Captain Horatio McCallister
Superintendent Chalmers
Cletus Spuckler
Disco Stu
Duffman
Crazy Old Man
Drederick Tatum
Legs
Wiseguy
Akira
Doug
Johnny Tightlips
Harry Shearer
Montgomery Burns
Waylon Smithers
Ned Flanders
Seymour Skinner
Otto Mann
Lenny Leonard
Reverend Timothy Lovejoy
Julius Hibbert
Kent Brockman
Jasper Beardley
Eddie
Rainier Wolfcastle
Scratchy
Marty
Dr. Marvin Monroe
Kang
Herman
Dewey Largo
Judge Snyder
Sanjay Nahasapeemapetilon
Benjamin
Jebediah Springfield
God
Tress MacNeille
Agnes Skinner
Lindsey Naegle
Brandine Spuckler
Cookie Kwan
Crazy Cat Lady
Bernice Hibbert
Dolph Starbeam
Mrs. Glick
Poor Violet
Lunchlady Doris
Ms. Albright
Brunella Pommelhorst
Pamela Hayden
Milhouse Van Houten
Rod Flanders
Jimbo Jones
Janey Powell
Sarah Wiggum
Malibu Stacy
Patches
Ruth Powers
Maggie Roswell
Maude Flanders12
Helen Lovejoy13
Elizabeth Hoover14
Luann Van Houten
Princess Kashmir
Russi Taylor
Martin Prince
&lt;U+00DC&gt;ter
Sherri and Terri
Wendell Borton
Lewis
Karl Wiedergott
Various
Recurring guest voices
Actor
Character(s)
Notes
Marcia Wallace
Edna Krabappel
Wallace is always credited as a special guest star, even though she has appeared in over 100 episodes since the series' inception.15
Kelsey Grammer
Sideshow Bob
Grammer has appeared since 1990.
Joe Mantegna
Fat Tony
Mantegna has appeared since 1991.
Albert Brooks
Hank Scorpio, Jacques &quot;Brunswick&quot;, Cowboy Bob, Brad Goodman, Tab Spangler.
Brooks has appeared as one-time characters in several episodes since 1990.
Jon Lovitz
Artie Ziff, Professor Lombardo, Aristotle Amadopoulos, Jay Sherman, Llewellyn Sinclair and Mrs. Sinclair, Enrico Irritazio.
Lovitz has appeared in several episodes since 1991.
Jan Hooks
Manjula Nahasapeemapetilon
Hooks has appeared as Manjula since 1997.
Maurice LaMarche
Various
LaMarche has appeared in several minor roles since 1995.
Jane Kaczmarek
Judge Constance Harm
Kaczmarek has appeared as Judge Harm since 2001.
Former cast members
Actor
Character(s)
Notes
Doris Grau
Lunchlady Doris
Voiced between 1989 and 1995, when the character was retired due to Grau's death.16
Phil Hartman
Troy McClure, Lionel Hutz
Voiced between 1991 and 1998, when the characters were retired due to Hartman's murder.17
Frank Welker
Santa's Little Helper, Snowball II and various other animals.
Voiced between 1991 and 2002, but has not appeared since &quot;The Lastest Gun in the West&quot;.18 Dan Castellaneta now provides the voices because Welker left the show, having asked for a raise because the voice was hurting his throat.19
Marcia Mitzman Gaven
Maude Flanders, Helen Lovejoy, Elizabeth Hoover
Voiced the majority of Maggie Roswell's characters between 1999 and 2002, whilst Roswell's contract with the show had been terminated over a pay dispute. Gaven has not appeared since.2021
Jo Ann Harris
Various
Voiced various additional parts between 1989 and 1992, but has not appeared since.22
Christopher Collins
Moe Syszlak, Mr. Burns, the presenter of America's Most Armed and Dangerous
Collins provided the voices of Mr. Burns and Moe in several season one episodes, but was replaced in the roles by Harry Shearer and Hank Azaria respectively. Collins died in 1994.23
Notes
A. Replaced Jackie Mason, which voiced Rabbi Krustofski in two episodes.
B. Replaced Frank Welker.
C. Doris was retired after Doris Grau's death, only to return in &quot;The Mook, the Chef, the Wife and Her Homer&quot;, when she was voiced by MacNielle.
D. Replaced guest star Pamela Reed, who voiced her on several occasions.
E. Between 1999 and 2002, Marcia Mitzman Gaven voiced the three characters, because Roswell's resigned after Fox refused to raise her travel expenses.
F. Wiedergott has appeared in several minor roles since 1998.
References
General
Specific
{{-}}  
pt:Anexo:Lista de dubladores de Simpsons 
Simpsons, The Category:The Simpsons
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
