Richard E. Cavazos (born January 31, 1929), a Korean War recipient of the Distinguished Service Cross as a first lieutenant, who advanced in rank to become the U.S. Army's first Hispanic four-star general.1 During the Vietnam War, as a lieutenant colonel, Cavazos was awarded a second Distinguished Services Cross. In 1976, Cavazos became the first Hipananic to reach the rank of brigadier general in the U.S. Army.2 Cavazos served with great distinction for thirty-three years, with his final command as head of the U.S. Army Forces Command.
Biography
Richard Cavazos, a Mexican-American3 was born on January 31, 1929 in Kingsville, Texas. He earned a B.S. degree in geology from Texas Technological University in 1951, where he was a distiguished graduate of the ROTC program. He received further military education at the U.S. Army Command and Staff College, the British Army Staff College, the Armed Forces Staff College, and the U.S. Army War College.4
Cavazos was commissioned as second lieutenant in the United States Army on June 15, 1951.5 He received basic officer training at Fort Benning, Georgia, followed by training at Airborne School. He then deployed to Korea with the 65th Infantry.
Korean War
During the Korean War, as a member of the 65th Infantry, a unit comprised of mostly Puerto Rican natives, distinguished himself, receiving the Silver Star and the Distinguished Service Cross for his heroic actions.
On February 25, 1953, Cavazos' Company E was attacked by the enemy. During the fight against a numerically superior enemy force, Cavazos distinguished himself and received the Silver Star for his actions. His company was able to emerge victorious from the battle.6 On June 14, 1953, Cavazos again distinguished himself during an attack on Hill 142, and was awarded the Distinguished Service Cross for his heroic actions on that day.7
Distinguished Service Cross citation (first award)
On September 10, 1953, per General Orders No. 832, Cavazos was awarded his first Distinguished Service Cross for his actions during the Korean War. His citation reads: 
Vietnam War
In February 1967, Cavazos, then a lieutenant colonel, became commander of the 1st Battalion, 18th Infantry.8 In October and November of 1967, his battalion was engaged in fighting near the Cambodian border. During an attack at Loc Ninh in October 1967, his unit was able to repulse the enemy. For his valiant leadership at Loc Ninh, he was awarded a second Distinguished Service Cross.
Distinguished Service Cross citation (second award)
On December 17, 1967, per General Orders No. 6479, Lieutenant Colonel Cavazos was awarded his second Distinguished Service Cross for his actions on October 30, 1967, while . His citation reads: 
Post-Vietnam
After Vietnam, Cavazos served as commander of the 2nd Brigade, 1st Infantry Division, and commander, 9th Infantry Division.
In 1976, Cavazos became the first Hipananic to reach the rank of brigadier general in the U.S. Army.9 In 1980, he became commander of III Corps — and is recognized for his innovative leadership of the Corps.10
In 1982, Cavazos again made military history by being appointed the Army's first Hispanic four-star general.11The same year, Cavazos assumed command of the U.S. Army Forces Command (FORSCOM). His early support for the National Training Center and his involvement in the development of the Battle Command Training Program enormously influenced the war fighting capabilities of the U.S. Army.12
On June 17, 1984, after thirty three years of distinguished service, General Cavazos retired from the U.S. Army.
In retirement
In 1985, General Cavazos was appointed to the Chemical Warfare Review Committee by President Reagan. Cavazos served on the Board of Regents of his alma mater, Texas Tech University.
Personal
General Cavazos is married and has four children. He resides in Texas.
Awards and decorations
General Cavazos' military awards include two Distinguished Service Crosses, a Silver Star,13 two Legion of Merit awards, five Bronze Stars, the Purple Heart, the Combat Infantry Badge, a Parachutist Badge. Cavazos has also been awarded an honorary lifetime membership in the National Guard Association of Texas; was inducted into the Fort Leavenworth Hall of Fame and Ranger Regiment Association Hall of Fame; and received the Doughboy Award of National Infantry Association, 1991.14
Notes
References
Cavazos, Richard Cavazos, Richard Cavazos, Richard Cavazos, Richard Cavazos, Richard Cavazos, Richard Cavazos, Richard Cavazos, Richard Cavazos, Richard
Celebrating Hispanic Heritage.↩
Hispanic Heritage Biographies.↩
Villahermosa, Army Magazine, 2002.↩
Cavazos profile, Hispanic Americans in the U.S. Army.↩
Cavazos&quot;, Celebrating Hispanic Heritage.↩
Hispanic Heritage Biographies.↩
CGSC profile.↩
Cavazos&quot;, Celebrating Hispanic Heritage.↩
1st Lieutenant Cavazos, Silver Star citation.↩
Hispanic Heritage Biographies.↩
