Lily Watkins Cohen Monteverde Bendahan Safra (born in 1932 in the outskirts of a city in Porto Alegre, Brazil to an English father) is a wealthy philanthropist and social figure. From a modest background, she attained considerable wealth after several marriages. Her net worth is estimated at $1 billion, ranking her as the 620th richest person in the world according Forbes in 2005.
Biography
Lily Safra was born in 1932 in the outskirts of the city of Porto Alegre, Brazil to an English father. At the age of 19, she married Mario Cohen, an Argentine hosiery magnate. They divorced in the early 1960s. In 1965, she married Freddy Monteverde, a magnate in the Brazilian appliance distribution business. Monteverde died in 1969, allegedly having committed suicide shootgun. He left his widow a reported &lt;U+00A3&gt;160 million. Her third marriage, in 1972, was shortlived. 
In 1976, she married Edmond Safra, a Brazilian-naturalized Jewish-Lebanese banker. Their international lifestyle included homes in New York, London, Geneva and the French Riviera. The couple never had any children.
Edmond Safra's Death
In 1999, Edmond Safra, a sufferer of Parkinson's disease, perished in a criminal fire at their apartment in Monaco. Lily Safra survived, as she made her way out of the burning building. An American nurse Ted Maher, was arrested under suspicion of starting the fire, and was convicted of the crime in 2002 by a Monaco court. He claimed that he started the fire to carry out a daring rescue, and thus increase his standing in the Safra family's eyes but he allegedly lost control of the fire unintentionally. The murder facts have been scrutinized by several media &quot;mystery solvers&quot; including 60 Minutes and by Dominick Dunne in Vanity Fair.
Philanthrophy
Lily Safra is the chairman of the Edmond J. Safra Philanthropic Foundation and is on the board of the Michael J. Fox Foundation For Parkinson's Research. She also serves on the boards of the Museum of Modern Art in New York City, the Somerset House Arts Fund, the Museum of Jewish Heritage, the Israel Philharmonic Orchestra. She has received numerous awards for her charitable work and involvement in the arts, including an honorary doctorate from The Hebrew University of Jerusalem and the title of Commandeur dans l'Ordre des Arts et des Lettres, bestowed by France's Ministry of Culture.
External links
Michael J. Fox Foundation For Parkinson's Research
www.fnih.org
pt:Lily Safra
Safra, Lily Safra, Lily Safra, Lily Safra, Lily Safra, Lily Safra
