Kushi () is a Telugu film which released on 27 April 2001 and was directed by S.J. Suryah. Pawan Kalyan, Bhoomika Chawla and Sivaji paired up for the first time in this film. It is the remake of the 2000 Tamil film of the same name which starred Vijay and Jyothika in the lead roles.The movie broke all the records of a previous film and is one of the most successful film of Pawan Kalyan. Kushi grossed  in 150 Days all over the world.The film completed 50 Days in 101 Centres.
Plot
The film opens when Madhumati or &quot;Madhu&quot; (Bhoomika Chawla) and Siddartha Roy or &quot;Siddhu&quot; (Pawan Kalyan) are born. Madhu's family is based in Konaseema in Andhra Pradesh and Sidhu's family is from Kolkota (he has a Telugu father and Bengali mother). As babies, Madhu and Siddhu meet in a shopping complex.
Madhu and her father love each other dearly. Madhu's father wants her daughter to get married and wanted to keep his son-in-law with them and so that his daughter will not leave him. However, her groom elopes with his girlfriend, apologizing to Madhu that he did not want to ruin another girl's life.
Siddhu receives a visa for higher studies in Canada , his car met with an accident on his way to airport, which results him hospitalized for a period. Incidentally, he receives Madhu's blood. Madhu's convinces her father to go for higher studies and not be bothered with marriage. Sidhu cannot make it to Canada and joins the same college as Madhu. Incidentally, they meet in a temple. They become good friends, while also helping Madhu's friend, Shanti, and Siddu's friend, Babu (Sivaji), who are in love. Shanti's father is a big goon, and Madhu and Siddhu ensure that Shanti and Babu do not reveal their love to Shanti's father and get into any trouble. One day while Madhu is studying for exams, Siddhu happens to come. Madhu's sari moves in the breeze, revealing her navel. Siddhu ogles it. Madhu accuses Siddhu of ogling, and Siddhu denies it. An argument breaks out leading to them accusing each other of hiding their feelings for the other. They end their friendship.
After the summer holidays, Shanti's dad finds out about Babu. Madhu and Siddhu meet again for the sake of their friend's love. In the course of getting Babu and Shanti together, they realize they love each other. The movie ends happily, with the duo married and happily squabbling.
Character map of Kushi (2000) and its remakes
Kushi (2000)
(Tamil)
Kushi (2001)
(Telugu)
Khushi (2003)
(Hindi)
Eno Onthara (2011)
(Kannada)
Vijay
Pawan Kalyan
Fardeen Khan
Golden Star Ganesh
Jyothika
Bhumika Chawla
Kareena Kapoor
Priyamani
Box office performance
The film had a 50 days run in 101 centres,1 100 days run in 79 centres2 and a 175-day run in five centres.3 It also set a record for highest grossing film in the Nizam State of Andhra Pradesh where it earned 200 million in only 100 days.4 Khushi grossed  in 100 Days all over the world.It collected  in 150 Days worldwide. The total collections are 22-23 crores. This was the 2nd biggest telugu hit film in 2001 after Narasimha naidu. 5
Records
Kushi grossed  60 lakhs in many theatres across the state. Sandhya 70mm dts A/C officials spoke that Kushi collected  from their theater in 160 Days.6 Kushi 2001 was released in 200 theaters worldwide later on after 2 years it was Re-released in 160 theaters.
Pre-release business
Gemini tv bought the satellite rights of the film for  1.5 crores later after span of a decade Maatv group renewed this film for the same price this film was a blockbuter on television and got decent TRP's. Music rights and home media rights were sold for  It did great business in each of its segments.
Soundtrack
Manisharma composed the soundtrack of the film.The audio was released in Hyderabad and became an instant hit.The audio was released in CD's for the time in Telugu along with cassettes by Aditya Music.A classic song called &quot;Aaduvari Maatalaku&quot; penned by Pingali from the movie Missama was remixed by Manisharma.It was sung by Murali.All the songs became chart-busters especially Ammaye Sannaga song penned by Chandra Bose and sung by Udit Narayan and Kavita Krishnamurthy.Other lyricists are A.M. Ratnam, Abbas Tyrewala, Chandra Bose, Pingali and Suddala Ashok Teja.
References
External links
Category:2001 films Category:Indian films Category:Telugu-language films Category:Films directed by S. J. Suryaah
Kushi 50 days centres↩
Kushi 100 days centres↩
http://www.cinegoer.com/pawankalyan175.htm↩
↩
http://www.sbdbforums.com/post/kushi-no-2-blockbuster-in-2001-5312576, http://www.idlebrain.com/trade/records/kushitotal.html, Sitara Magazine↩
http://dailyupdatesof.tripod.com/megabrothers/id5.html↩
