Drosera viridis is a semi-erect or rosetted perennial species in the carnivorous plant genus Drosera. It is endemic to Brazil, being found in eastern Paran&lt;U+00E1&gt; and S&lt;U+00E3&gt;o Paulo and central Santa Catarina at elevations from . It may, however, also be found in adjacent Argentina, Paraguay, and Uruguay. It typically grows in waterlogged habitats among grasses in white-clayey, reddish lateritic, or humus-rich black-brown soils and is sometimes found submerged with only the leaves above water.1
Drosera viridis produces carnivorous leaves that are spatulate, about 5 to 28 mm long, and entirely green, even when exposed to full sun, unlike the related D. communis whose leaves turn red in full sunlight. Each plant produces one to three erect or ascending inflorescences, which are  long, including the scape. Each inflorescence bears two to twelve light to dark lilac-colored flowers each. It can be found flowering year-round, though more plants are in flower during the wet season from December to March.2 This species has a diploid chromosome number of 2n = 20.3
Drosera viridis is closely related to D. communis and often occurs in the same regions with it, but D. viridis is restricted to a more narrow range of wet habitats. Where D. viridis and D. communis are sympatric, a few specimens have been found that may be hybrids, though they were weak, indicating that the resulting hybrid cross between these two are rare, infertile, and may not reach maturity.4
This species was first described by botanist Fernando Rivadavia in a 2003 issue of the Carnivorous Plant Newsletter, along with three other new Drosera species from Brazil. The type specimen was collected by Rivadavia and M. R. F. Cardoso on 2 February 1996.5 Other specimens were grown under greenhouse conditions for further obervation. Rivadavia chose the specific epithet viridis to refer to the green color of the plants even when exposed to full sun.6
See also
List of Drosera species
Taxonomy of Drosera
References
Category:Carnivorous plants of South America viridis Category:Flora of Brazil Category:Plants described in 2003
Rivadavia, Fernando. 2003. Four new species of sundews, Drosera (Droseraceae), from Brazil. Carnivorous Plant Newsletter, 32(3): 79-92.↩
Rivadavia, Fernando. 2005. [http://www.carnivorousplants.org/cpn/articles/CPNv34n3p85_91.pdf New chromosome numbers for Drosera L. (Droseraceae). Carnivorous Plant Newsletter, 34(3): 85-91.↩
↩
