Sigaus childi is an endangered protected species of grasshopper from South Island, New Zealand known from the Alexandra district. Two species of grasshoppers are listed for protection under the Wildlife Act 1953 of New Zealand this include S. childi and Brachaspis robustus.1 The genus Sigaus is endemic to the New Zealand.
Distribution and habitat
 There are two isolated populations of S. childi, one near the township of Alexandra and the other east of the township. Searches have been carried out on the northern end of the Knobby Range, North Rough Ridge, and the Rock and Pillar Range. All have failed to locate further populations of Sigaus childi.23 Sigaus childi is primarily found on dry, open, sparsely vegetated slopes. They are rarely found on modified farmland and are usually on north facing hillsides. Most of the Sigaus childi sites appear rocky, but this is mainly due to the low growing and sparse vegetation present there.
Species description
The wings on S. childi are micropterous (small wings) between  making this species flightless like most of New Zealand grasshoppers. Sigaus childi is highly crypsis, there is no polymorphism within this species. It will match the surrounding lichens. Colours are always earth tones. Male body length ; Female body length .
File:NZAcrididae2.JPG|A male Sigaus childi. File:NZAcrididae1.JPG|A female Sigaus childi. File:NZAcrididae15.JPG|The highly cryptic colouring of S. childi.
Type Information
Jamieson, C.D. 1999: A new species of Sigaus from Alexandra, New Zealand (Orthoptera: Acrididae). New Zealand Journal of Zoology, 26: 43-48.
Type locality: Galloway Station, Otago. .
Type specimen: Male; 15 December 1997; Colleen D Jamieson; Holotype and Paratype are deposited in the Otago Museum, Dunedin.
Etymology: Named after the late Peter Child4 of Alexandra, who first collected it from Graveyard Gully in 1967.5
References
Category:Acrididae Category:Acrididae of New Zealand Category:Animals described in 1999
↩
Morris, S.J. Grasshopper Identification Sheet - Sigaus childi. Department of Conservation, Alexandra.↩
Morris, S.J. 2003. Distribution and Taxonomic status of New Zealand endangered grasshoppers (Orthoptera: Acrididae). Department of Conservation, Wellington.↩
http://species.wikimedia.org/wiki/Peter_Child↩
Bigelow, R.S. The Grasshoppers of New Zealand, Their Taxonomy and Distribution. University of Canterbury, Christchurch. 1967. p.60.↩
