WFXR-TV is the FOX-affiliated television station in Roanoke, Virginia. Licensed to the city, the station broadcasts its analog signal on UHF channel 27 and its digital signal on UHF channel 17. WFXR's transmitter is located on Poor Mountain in Roanoke County.
WFXR operates a full-time satellite, WWCW in Lynchburg, Virginia. Licensed to the city, WWCW broadcasts its analog signal on UHF channel 21 and its digital signal on UHF channel 20. WWCW's transmitter is located in the Blue Ridge Mountains 10 miles west of Bedford.
Together, the two stations are known on-air as &quot;FOX 21 / 27&quot; and are owned by Grant Broadcasting System II. The station's main studios are located in Roanoke while additional offices are located in Lynchburg. WFXR &amp; WWCW operate the area's CW affiliate on their DT2 digital subchannels. It is also offered on Cox cable channel 5 which is why the affiliate is known on-air as &quot;CW 5&quot;.
History
The channel 27 frequency in Roanoke was originally home to WROV-TV, which operated from late 1952 until early 1953. It was the first UHF station in the country to go dark after less than three months on the air. Southwest Virginia is very mountainous and the difficulties faced by UHF stations at the time were magnified by the area's rugged terrain. Its facilities were eventually sold to the Times-World Corporation to launch its new station, WDBJ-TV in 1955.
Also appearing on the channel 27 frequency was WRFT, which was known to have broadcasted from the early 1960s to 1974 as an ABC affiliate. At the time, the area's primary ABC affiliate, WLVA-TV in Lynchburg (now WSET-TV), provided only marginal coverage of Roanoke.
The current incarnation of channel 27 debuted on July 11, 1981 as religious station WVFT-TV (Victory Faith Television). It was the first non-network station to sign on in the Roanoke / Lynchburg market as well as the first new commercial station in the area since WDBJ signed on 26 years earlier. On June 5, 1983, WVFT became the area's first full-service independent station. It lost its license in 1984 (for reasons that are unknown to this day), but was sold to new owners later in the year. The FCC licensed it as a new station, retaining the WVFT calls.
In 1984, Jefferson-Pilot Communications (now Lincoln Financial Media) launched WJPR as an independent station on channel 21, with the callsign meaning Jefferson Pilot Radio. In 1986, WJPR became a charter FOX affiliate.
On September 15, 1993, Milt Grant bought WJPR and WVFT, and began airing the same programming on both stations with WVFT serving as the main station. Although channel 21 decently covers Roanoke, it doesn't provide a strong signal to the New River Valley (despite its 4.1 million-watt ERP). The two stations provide a strong combined signal with 60% overlap. In October of 1993, WVFT was renamed WFXR-TV.
In 1996, Fox 21/27 approached NBC affiliate WSLS-TV on the topic of a &quot;news sharing agreement&quot;. The deal would allow WSLS to produce a 10 PM newscast for Fox 21/27. They had originally approached CBS affiliate WDBJ with a similar idea, but nothing came of it. &quot;The FOX 10 O'Clock News&quot; with Frances Scott and John Carlin premiered on October 28, 1996 as the market's first primetime newscast.
On June 30, 2006, the call letters of WJPR were changed to WWCW. The new call letters matched the new affiliation agreement with The CW, which appear on both station's DT2 digital subchannel (see below). FOX will continue to be on both WFXR and WWCW, with both analog and digital signals. This drew the ire of some people who were used to the WJPR calls, as well as of those who think the WWCW calls should only be used if that station's analog channel is a CW affiliate as well. At present, Grant has no plans to split off the two stations and make channel 21 solely a CW station.
&quot;WBVA-TV&quot; &quot;WB 5&quot;
WFXB &amp; WWCW operated the area's cable-only WB affiliate known by the fictional calls of &quot;WBVA-TV&quot;. It was offered on Cox cable channel 5 and as a result was known on-air as &quot;WB 5&quot;. When WFXB &amp; WWCW's digital signals signed on in April of 2002, WBVA was added to their DT2 digital subchannels. The WB afiliate was also offered on DirecTV and Dish Network.
On January 24, 2006, the UPN and WB networks announced that they would end broadcasting and merge. The newly combined network would be called The CW, the letters representing the first initial of its corporate parents CBS (the parent company of UPN) and the Warner Bros. unit of Time Warner.
On March 28, 2006, it was announced that WBVA would become the area's CW affiliate. To reflect this, the fictional WBVA calls were changed to &quot;WCW5-TV&quot; in June of 2006. The CW began broadcasting on September 18, 2006 which is when the affiliate changed its branding to &quot;CW 5&quot;.
Newscasts
WFXR &amp; WWCW's daily 10 PM newscast is produced by the area's NBC affiliate WSLS. This is a result of a news share agreement between the stations. The newscast is simulcasted on &quot;CW 5&quot;. Whenever FOX programming or sports delays the broadcast of the 10 PM newscasts on WFXR &amp; WWCW, it is aired on &quot;CW 5&quot;.
The FOX 21 / 27 10 O'Clock News
Weekdays (10 to 11 PM)
Anchor: John Carlin
Weather: Ros Runner
Sports: John Appicello
Weekends (10 to 10:30 PM)
Anchor: Dawn Jefferies
Weather: Patrick McKee
Sports: Chris Whitley
during WSLS-produced WFXR / WWCW newscasts, additional news personnel from WSLS are used, see the main WSLS article for a complete listing
External Links
Station Website
&quot;WCW5-TV&quot; &quot;CW 5&quot; Website
WSLS Website
(construction permit for a WFXR booster in Lynchburg)
(construction permit for a WWCW booster in Roanoke)
Category:Television stations in Virginia Category:CW network subchannel-only affiliates Category:Roanoke, Virginia Category:Channel 21 TV stations in the United States Category:Channel 27 TV stations in the United States
