The February 15, 2003 anti-war protest was a coordinated day of protests across the world against the imminent invasion of Iraq. Millions of people protested in approximately 800 cities around the world. According to BBC News, between six and ten million people took part in protests in up to sixty countries over the weekend of the 15th and 16th; other estimates range from eight million to thirty million.12
The biggest protests took place in Europe. The protest in Rome involved around 3 million people, and is listed in the 2004 Guinness Book of World Records as the largest anti-war rally in history.3 Opposition to the war was highest in the Middle East, although protests there were relatively small - Mainland China was the only major region not to see any protests.
Background
In 2002, the United States government began to argue for the necessity of invading Iraq. This formally began with a speech by U.S President George W. Bush to the United Nations General Assembly on September 12, 2002 which argued that the Iraqi government of Saddam Hussein was violating U.N. resolutions, primarily on weapons of mass destruction.4
The proposed war was controversial with many people questioning the motives of the U.S government and its rationale.5 One poll which covered 41 countries claimed that less than 10% would support an invasion of Iraq without UN sanction and that half would not support an invasion under any circumstances.6
Anti-war groups across the world organised public protests. According to the French academic Dominique Reyni&lt;U+00E9&gt; between the 3rd of January and 12th of April 2003, 36 million people across the globe took part in almost 3,000 anti-war protests, the demonstrations on February 15 2003 being the largest and most prolific.7
The invasion of Iraq began on March 20, 2003.
International coordination
The February 15 international protests were unprecedented not only in terms of the size of the demonstrations but also in terms of the international coordination involved. Researchers from the University of Antwerp claim that the day was possible only because it &quot;was carefully planned by an international network of national social movement organisations.&quot;8
Immanuel Wallerstein has spoken of the international protests as being organised by the forces of &quot;the Porto Alegre camp in reference to the emergence of global social movements who had been organising around international events such as the 2001 World Social Forum in Porto Alegre.&quot;9 Some commentators claim this is an example of &quot;grassroots globalization&quot;, for example one book claims that &quot;The worldwide protests were made possible by globalization ... But make no mistake&lt;U+2014&gt;this was not your CEO's globalization. The peace demonstrations represented, not a globalisation of commerce, but a globalization of conscience&quot;.10
The idea for an international day of demonstrations was first raised by the British anti-capitalist group Globalise Resistance (GR) in the wake of an anti-war demonstration in Britain of 400,000 on 28 September. At the time GR was involved in planning for the Florence European Social Forum (ESF) and brought up the suggestion at an ESF planning meeting. According to GR's Chris Nineham, &quot;There was considerable controversy. Some delegates were worried it would alienate the mainstream of the movement. We, alongside the Italian delegates, had to put up a strong fight to get it accepted.&quot;11
The proposal was accepted and at the final rally of the ESF, in November 2002, the call officially went out for Europe-wide demonstrations on 15 February 2003. This call was firmed up in December at a planning meeting for the next (2003) ESF which took place in Copenhagen. This meeting was attended by delegates from many European anti-war organisations, the US group United for Peace and Justice, and representatives of groups from the Philippines. The decision was taken to set up a Europe-wide anti-war website and to commit to spreading organisational coordination both within and beyond Europe. An email network connecting the different national organisations across Europe, and eventually also the different US groups, was set up.1213
In December 2002, the Cairo Anti-war Conference pledged to organise demonstrations in Egypt and the International Campaign Against Aggression on Iraq (which came out of the Cairo conference) sought to co-ordinate more demonstrations across the world. Around this time, the US anti-war group ANSWER called for actions in North America supporting the proposed protests in Europe.14
Another important platform for the spreading call to demonstrate internationally occurred at the World Social Forum in Porto Alegre, Brazil which took place at the end of 2002. European delegates sought to popularise the plan for the increasingly international demonstration. They met with some success, including the organisation of an anti-war assembly which was attended by almost 1000 people.15
Europe
Demonstrations took place across Europe and some of the largest drawing attendance figures in the tens of thousands in many cities. Approximately one-fifth of the total demonstrators worldwide protested in Europe.
London
Britain's Stop the War Coalition (StWC) held a protest in London which it claimed was the largest political demonstration in the city's history. Police estimated attendance in excess of 750,000 people and the demonstration's organisers estimated that around 2 million attended.16 The protest was organised under the slogan &quot;No war on Iraq - freedom for Palestine&quot;.
Organisation
 The StWC, who had previously held a series of demonstrations and rallies against the Afghanistan war and the upcoming Iraq war, called for a national demonstration in London for February 15, the agreed-upon international day of protest. The Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament (CND) and the Muslim Association of Britain joined the StWC for this event.
In the lead-up to February 15, the StWC was organising the march from a small office donated by the National Association of Teachers in Further and Higher Education. As the day approached, it became clear to the organisers that this event would be much larger than any previous rally, so it was agreed that the march would start from two separate locations; Thames Embankment for Londoners and those travelling in from the south, and Gower Street for those travelling in from the midlands and the north. The plan was for the two marches to merge at Piccadilly Circus and then proceed to a rally at Hyde Park.1718
The negotiations for this plan faltered when government Secretary of State for Culture, Media and Sport Tessa Jowell instructed the Royal Parks Agency to deny permission for the rally in Hyde Park - ostensibly for safety reasons and to protect the grass.19 This hitch in the StWC&lt;U+2019&gt;s plans was resolved when, after failure to agree on an alternative venue and much pressure from the StWC, this decision was reversed.
The demonstration gained widespread support. It was backed by the Mayor of London Ken Livingstone who used his position to help resolve the administrative issues. Previously the British press had taken a low view of the newsworthiness of demonstrations, with The Guardian claiming to have a general policy not to cover them. However, sections of the media came over to support this demonstration. For example, The Daily Mirror gave large coverage in the lead up to the march and provided thousands of placards. The demonstration also received sponsorship support from Greenpeace and Mecca-Cola.20
As the march drew near, the BBC predicted that around 500,000 people would attend, while the StWC was hoping for numbers to top the symbolically significant million mark.21
The event
 On the day of the protest, the weather was grey and cold, but people were in high spirits even as London became gridlocked and protesters were stuck for hours at Gower Street and Embankment. Hundreds of coaches brought protesters from 250 towns and cities across the UK,22 with around 100 coaches coming from Wales alone.23 Many commentators noted the diversity of those attending the march. Euan Ferguson noted in The Observer24 that: 
All police leave in the capital was cancelled for the event, though Scotland Yard later said that it passed off almost without incident.25
The fashion model Kate Moss and designer Alexander McQueen led a group of protesters from the fashion world.26 Also among protesters was the graffiti artist Banksy, who produced placards for the demonstration with the slogan 'Wrong War'.27
Protesters who managed to reach Hyde Park in time heard various speakers, including George Galloway, Tony Benn and Bianca Jagger but many protesters missed out. Those that had to get coaches back to their home locations had to abandon the march before it had finished and protesters at back end of the march who did stay on did not reach Hyde Park until hours after the speakers and performers had all finished. Charles Kennedy, then the leader of the Liberal Democrats, was a late addition to the list of speakers. There was some media speculation that he only decided to speak after a lead article in The Guardian was critical of his absence from the planned speaker list.28
There had been some controversy within the StWC over allowing Kennedy to speak since his party was committed to opposing the war only in the absence of a second UN resolution, but the coalition decided that failing to invite him &quot;would have been divisive for the movement and would have fragmented anti-war opposition to the war.&quot;29
Because of the size of the march, it is hard to estimate the number of people in attendance. It is probably safe to say that the march was the largest ever political demonstration in the UK30 and the biggest taking to the streets since the Golden Jubilee weekend in 2002.31
In an ICM poll for The Guardian (14 February-16 February 2002), 6% of people claimed that someone from their household went on the march or had intended to. The StWC claims that this translates into 1.25 million households and thus supports the estimate of two million people, assuming that more than one person could come from each household.3233
RadioVague, Psand.net and CableRadio broadcast speeches, music and interviews from the event to the internet throughout the day.34
Scotland
In addition to the demonstrations in London, the United Kingdom also saw protests in Scotland. Anti-war activists planned a demonstration in Glasgow which would end at the Scottish Exhibition and Conference Centre (SECC) where the Labour Party was holding a conference for party members. The Labour Party requested that the SECC refuse permission for a stage and PA system outside the conference hall. In response to this the Scottish Socialist Party MSP Tommy Sheridan tabled a motion in the Scottish Parliament to allow the event to take place, condemning what he claimed were attempts to &quot;stifle all opposition to warmonger Blair&quot;. The Labour Party was unsuccessful in blocking the demonstrators' plans. Tony Blair was due to give a speech at the same time as the protesters would have arrived outside the conference centre, but the speech was rescheduled to an earlier time to avoid this.35
On the day more than 50,000 people (Guardian estimate) joined the march, which started at Glasgow Green. By the time the front of the march had travelled the two miles (3.2 km) to the SECC, Blair had delivered his speech and had left the area. One protester was quoted as saying &quot;We've chased him out of town.&quot;36
Ireland
In Ireland, the Dublin march was only expected to draw 20,000 people, but the actual figure was given variously as 80,000 (police estimate), 90,000 (BBC estimate), 100,000 (Guardian estimate) or 150,000 (Socialist Worker (SW) estimate). The march went from Parnell Square, passing the Department of Foreign Affairs at St. Stephen's Green, and on to the Dame Street for a rally where popular Irish folk singer Christy Moore, Kila and Labour Party politician Michael D Higgins were among many speakers from the platform. The march disrupted traffic for more than four hours. Protesters demanded that the Irish government stop allowing the United States military to use Ireland's Shannon Airport as a transatlantic stop-off point in bringing soldiers to the Middle East.37
Northern Ireland
The Northern Irish march was held in Belfast, where 10,000 (Guardian estimate) to 20,000 (SW estimate) protesters from across the sectarian divide joined the demonstration. The march started at the Arts College at 2:30pm and moved through that Royal Avenue towards Belfast City Hall. Prominent politicians from Sinn F&lt;U+00E9&gt;in, the Social Democratic and Labour Party (SDLP) and the centrist Alliance Party joined the protest. Sinn F&lt;U+00E9&gt;in president Gerry Adams spoke from the platform at the end rally saying &quot;If President Bush and Mr Blair want war, it should be war against poverty and for equality.&quot; There was also a rally in Newry in County Down attending by hundreds of protesters (BBC estimate).383940
Rome
The biggest demonstration of the global day of protest took place in Italy in Rome. Thirty trains were specially chartered to bring people to the demonstration, which was organised under the slogan &quot;Stop the war; no ifs or buts&quot;. The organisers were shocked at the size of the turn out and the unexpected number of people forced the demonstration to set off two hours early.41 650,000 people (police estimate) took place in a final rally at which there were many international speakers including Kurds, Iraqi dissidents, Palestinians, a representative of the American Council of Christian Churches and an Israeli conscientious objector who addressed the crowd from a stage hung with Pablo Picasso's Guernica. The size of the demonstration meant that the majority of demonstrators did not make it into the final rally and in total three million people (organisers' estimate, supported by the Guinness Book of World Records) were on the streets. This was listed in the 2004 Guinness Book of World Records as the largest anti-war rally in history.42 According to the Green Left Weekly (GLW), the demonstration contained people from across Italian society; &quot;Catholic nuns and priests marched alongside young people with dreadlocks, nose rings and Palestinian scarves. Christians, anarchists and communists mingled&quot;.43
France
In France, there were demonstrations in somewhere between twenty (Observer estimate) and eighty cities (WSWS estimate); the organisers estimated that over half a million marched in total. The biggest demonstration took place in Paris where around 100,000 (USA Today estimate) to 200,000 (WSWS estimate) people marched through the streets, ending in a rally at the Place de la Bastille. This location's role in the French Revolution was considered to give it a historical significance.444546 There was also a demonstration in Toulouse of around 10,000 people.47
Germany
In Germany, coaches brought people from over 300 German towns to Berlin to join a demonstration of 300,000 (police estimate) to 500,000 (organizers' estimate) people; the largest demonstration that had occurred in Berlin for several decades.4849 Protesters, including members of Gerhard Schr&lt;U+00F6&gt;der's government, filled the boulevard between the Brandenburg Gate and the Victory Column.5051 ATTAC Germany's spokesperson Malte Keutzseldt was reported as praising the broadness of the demonstration, saying &quot;The churches and trade unions have linked to make the coalition far broader than even the anti-nuclear missile marches in the 1980s.&quot;52
Spain
 Spain saw demonstrations in around 55 cities and towns across the country;53 the largest was probably in the capital city Madrid, where between 660,000 (Government source&lt;U+2019&gt;s estimate) and 2,000,000 (GLW estimate) took part in what was probably the biggest demonstration since the death of the fascist dictator Francisco Franco in 1975.54 Barcelona also had a large, with estimates of 350,000 (Delegaci&lt;U+00F3&gt;n de Gobierno), 1,300,000 (Barcelona city hall and Police) or 1,500,000 (GLW) people55 joining a demonstration which moved from the Passeig de Gr&lt;U+00E0&gt;cia to the Pla&lt;U+00E7&gt;a de Tetuan. Spain also had demonstrations of approximately 500,000 in Valencia (GLW estimate), 250,000 in Seville (GLW estimate) (200,000 Government sources estimate), 100,000 in Las Palmas de Gran Canaria (GLW estimate) and 100,000 in Cadiz' (GLW estimate) as well as over fifty other towns and cities across the country (WSWS estimate).56 Particularly remarkable was the turnout in the small Asturian city of Oviedo which had a turnout of 100,000 even though its total population was only 180,000.57
Malta
The island of Malta saw around 1,000 demonstrators (SW estimate) join a protest. The weather was cold and rainy. After the demonstration an anti-war concert was held in the capital, Valletta.58
Scandinavia
 Norway saw its biggest series of protests since 1917. The biggest took place in its capital Oslo were more than 60,000 protesters (Police estimate and Socialist Worker estimate) joining a demonstration. Protests of around 15,000 took place in Bergen and Trondheim, and 10,000 in Stavanger. Small protests also took place in at least 30 towns across the country. At the rally in Oslo the vice-chair of the Norwegian Confederation of Trade Unions (LO) spoke from the platform claiming that &quot;Bush only cares about American oil interests&quot;.59 In Denmark 20,000 to 30,000 protesters (WSWS estimate) took part in a march in the capital city, Copenhagen.60 and Sweden in 35,000 demonstrated in Stockholm61
Benelux
 The Benelux countries had large demonstrations for their total population size. In Belgium organisers had expected around 30,000 people to attend a demonstration in Brussels its capital city which is the home of the European Parliament, and they were shocked by a turn out of approximately 100,000 people (WSWS and GLW estimate). The march took over 3 hours to cross the city.62 In Luxembourg, approximately 14,000 people demonstrated and the Netherlands saw around 70,000 (USA Today estimate) to 75,000 people (WSWS estimate) protest in Amsterdam.6364 This was the countries largest demonstration since the anti-nuclear campaigns of the 1980s.65
Alpine Countries
This level of protest was also apparent in the Alpine countries. In Austria, 30,000 people (SW estimate) took to the streets of its capital, Vienna.66 In Switzerland in order to &quot;concentrate the movement&quot; most activists agreed to organise a single demonstration for the whole country in Bern. On the day roughly 40,000 people joined the protest in front of the Bundeshaus, the seat of the Swiss federal government and parliament. The demonstration, which ran under the slogan &quot;Nein zum Krieg gegen Irak - Kein Blut f&lt;U+00FC&gt;r &lt;U+00D6&gt;l!&quot; (No to war in Iraq - no blood for oil!) was the largest in Switzerland since 1945.67 In Slovenia, roughly 3.000 people gathered in the capital's central park of Kongresni trg, supported by the mayor Danica Sim&lt;U+0161&gt;i&lt;U+010D&gt;, and marched the streets in one of the largest demonstrations since independence in 1991. 68
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Bosnia and Herzegovina saw around 100 protesters gather in Mostar. This protest spanned the sectarian divide with both Muslims and Croats attending.69
Croatia
There were also protests in Croatia where 10,000 people (WSWS estimate) took part in a protest in the capital city of Zagreb. Croatia also saw protests in Osijek, Vukovar, Knin, Zadar, Sibenik, Split and Dubrovnik.70
Czech Republic
In the Czech Republic, over 1,000 people joined a rally at Jan Palach Square in Prague. Czech philosopher Erazim Kohak addressed the crowd, saying, &quot;War is not a solution, war is a problem.&quot;71 Protesters listened to music and speeches before marching to the Czech government building, where they submitted petitions, then march continued to the US embassy.72
Hungary
There was a demonstration in Budapest, Hungary, of 60,000 people (SW estimate)73
Poland
There was a demonstration in Warsaw, Poland of 10,000 people (SW estimate). The demonstration through central Warsaw passed the US embassy.
Serbia
Small demonstrations also took place in Serbia, where there was a demonstration of 200 people (WSWS estimate) in the capital city of Belgrade,74
Russia
Russia which had several demonstrations the largest accruing in Moscow, with 400 people (WSWS estimate) in attendance.75
Ukraine
There was also a demonstration in Ukraine of around 2,000 people (USA Today estimate) joined a &quot;Rock against the war&quot; rally Kievs central square.76
Turkey
The main demonstration in Turkey took place in Istanbul, thousands (SW estimate) demonstrated. The local authorities had banned the protest claiming to have worries about national security, however the protest organisers went ahead with the rally under the cover of calling a press conference.77
Before the rally there were many arrests and supporters of the march have accused the police of targeting &quot;dark looking people&quot; with the aim of stopping Kurds, many carrying placards referring to the Kurdish issue, from attending the demonstration.78 Kurds made up around half of the demonstration and most were demonstrating both against the war and against Turkish treatment of Kurds. When the rally finished all those who had spoken from the platform were arrested then later released without charge. This included two stars of one of Turkey's most popular TV comedy show who had announced on the previous Friday night episode of their show that they would be attending the demonstration.
Turkey also saw demonstrations in Adana, Ankara, &lt;U+0130&gt;zmir, Zonguldak, &lt;U+0130&gt;zmit, Antalya and Mugla.79
Greece
 In Athens, Greece, 150,000 people (WSWS estimate) demonstrated. The protest was generally peaceful, but a small group clashed with police. The police fired tear gas at the group some of whom threw rocks and petrol bombs. Police reported that the trouble was down to a group of anarchists who had split off from the main demonstration.80
Cyprus
Cyprus saw a demonstration of from 500 (USA Today estimate) to more than 800 people (SW estimate) at the British army base in Dhekelia. Enduring heavy rain protesters briefly blocked the base. They then marched to Pyla village where they watched other demonstrations occurring across the world on a giant screen. The demonstration was mostly attended by Greek Cypriots but they were joined by some Turkish Cypriots.8182
Americas
Canada
Canada saw protests in 70 cities and towns (WSWS estimate).83 The biggest took place in Montreal where more than 100,000 people protested (SW and WSWS each estimated 150,000) despite wind-chill temperatures of below &lt;U+2212&gt;30 &lt;U+00B0&gt;C (&lt;U+2212&gt;22 &lt;U+00B0&gt;F). 80,000 people joined a demonstration in Toronto, 40,000 in Vancouver, 8,000 in Victoria, 4,000 in Halifax and 6,000 in Ottawa. Some of the other major centres where protests were held included Windsor, Edmonton and Calgary.84
There were protests in 70 cities in total. These demonstrations took place despite very cold weather, average temperatures were below −35 &lt;U+00B0&gt;C (−31 &lt;U+00B0&gt;F).8586 In Chicoutimi, 1,500 people braved a −40 &lt;U+00B0&gt;C (−40 &lt;U+00B0&gt;F) wind-chill temperature including wind gusts reaching 50 km/h (31 mi/h), in what was surely one of the coldest marches of the global day of protest.
United States
Protests took place all across the United States of America with CBS reporting that 150 U.S. cities had protests.
Massive Anti-War Outpouring (2nd ref)
 According to the World Socialist Web Site, protests took place in 225 different communities.87
The largest protests took place in the nation's largest cities including Chicago, Los Angeles, and New York City, but there were also smaller rallies in towns such as Gainesville, Georgia; Macomb, Illinois; and Juneau, Alaska, among scores of others.88
New York
Organisers of the New York City protest had hoped to march past the United Nations Building. However, a week before the march, police claimed that they would not be able to ensure order and District Court Judge Barbara Jones ruled against allowing the route. Instead, protesters were only permitted to hold a stationary rally.89
According to Donna Lieberman, executive director of the New York City Civil Liberties Union, judicial denial of a permit for a protest march was an unprecedented restriction of civil liberties, as marching and parading through New York's public streets to express various points-of-view is &quot;a time-honoured tradition in our country that lies at the core of the First Amendment&quot;.90
On the day, over 300 buses and four special trains brought protesters in from across the country. 100,000 protesters (BBC estimate) took part in a rally near the UN building. Among those taking part in the demonstration was the 9/11 Families For Peaceful Tomorrows, a group made up of some relatives of victims of the attacks on the World Trade Center. Speakers included politicians, church leaders and entertainers, such as actress Susan Sarandon and South African Anglican Archbishop Desmond Tutu.91
As people tried to reach the rally area they ended up constituting an unplanned march, stretching twenty blocks down First Avenue and overflowing onto Second and Third Avenue.92 In total there may have been 300,000 to 400,000 protesters (WSWS estimate).93
The protests were largely peaceful though a small group of protesters who were reported to have broken off from the main rally, caused damage to property in the Union Square district, and threw stones at police officers, which resulted in forty arrests.94 There were numerous complaints that the police were too heavy handed. Many streets were blocked off and protesters reported feeling hemmed in and scared. By the end of the day, police reported that there had been roughly 275 arrests; organisers dispute this number, claiming that there were 348 arrests. The local Independent Media Center produced a short video claiming to show inappropriate and violent police behaviour, including backing horses into demonstrators, shoving people into the metal barricades, spraying a toxic substance at penned-in demonstrators, using abusive language, and raising nightsticks against some who couldn't move. However, NYPD spokesman Michael O'Looney denied the charges claiming that the tape was &quot;filled with special effects&quot; and that it did not prove the police had not been provoked.95
A CNN journalist reported that the crowd was diverse, including &quot;older men and women in fur coats, parents with young children, military veterans and veterans of the anti-war movement.&quot;96
Singer/songwriter Conor Oberst (Bright Eyes) wrote a song about the day's events, called Old Soul Song (For the New World Order), which appeared on his 2005 album I'm Wide Awake, It's Morning. It included the lyrics &quot;We walked the forty blocks to the middle/Of the place we heard that everything would be/And there were barricades to keep us off the street/But the crowd kept pushing forward/'til they swallowed the police/Yeah, they went wild/Yeah, they went wild...&quot;97
Other U.S. cities
 At a demonstration in Los Angeles, California 50,000 (WSWS estimate98 to 60,000 (GLW estimate) protesters (CNN said &quot;thousands&quot;) marched down Hollywood Boulevard filling it for four blocks. Amongst the protesters were the actors Martin Sheen and Mike Farrell and director Rob Reiner. Martin Sheen, who at the time was playing a fictitious U.S. president in The West Wing, said that &quot;None of us can stop this war ... there is only one guy that can do that and he lives in the White House.&quot;99
Other activists in California originally planned to hold a protest in San Francisco on the Saturday but they changed to the Sunday in order not to conflict with the city's Chinese New Year's parade. The protest was held on Sunday February 16. One BBC estimate put the crowd at 150,000 people,100 while protest organizers and police agreed that the crowd count was 200,000 people. However, a San Francisco Chronicle photographic investigation estimated that the number in attendance at the peak period was closer to 65,000 people, although it did not state how many people were in attendance for the duration of the demonstration.101 This dispute highlights the continuing debate over the accuracy of crowd estimates in large public demonstrations.
There was some controversy over Rabbi Michael Lerner not being selected as a speaker for the rally at the end of the demonstration. Lerner claimed that he was not picked to speak for reasons of anti-semitism due to his support for the existence of the Israeli state. The organisers responded with a statement that he was not picked because of an arrangement between the groups that organised the demonstration that there would be no speakers that had publicly attacked any other anti-war group and that &quot;since he had publicly attacked A.N.S.W.E.R. in both the New York Times and Tikkun community email newsletters, his inclusion in the program would violate [this] agreement.&quot; They also noted that two rabbis with views similar to those of Michael Lerner would be speaking.102
In Colorado Springs, 4,000 protesters were dispersed with pepper spray, tear gas, tazers and batons. 34 were arrested on failure to disperse and other charges103 and at least two protesters had to have hospital treatment.104 
In Seattle organisers aimed to have 20 to 30 thousand people join a march from Seattle Center following a giant blue planet, the emblem adopted by the march organisers. On the day 50,000 people (GLW estimate) turned out to protest under the dual slogun &quot;Stop the war on Iraq; Stop the war on immigrants&quot;, more than on the Seattle protests against the WTO Ministerial Conference of 1999.105
Demonstrations also took place in Philadelphia, where thousands (CNN estimate) joined a march to the Liberty Bell,106 and in Chicago where 10,000 people demonstrated (GLW estimate).107
In Florida a small number of protesters staged a naked protest on Palm Beach. They initially had some problems getting permission for the action, but on the Thursday before, a U.S. District court ruled that the planned nude protest was legal at the public beach. Most of the attendees had come from the four-day Mid-Winter Naturist Festival that was taking place at the same time.108 There was also a demonstration of 900 people (USA Today estimate) on the island of Puerto Rico.109
Mexico
The chief demonstration in Mexico took place in Mexico City where around 10,000 people (USA Today estimate) joined a demonstration which ended with a rally at a heavily guarded US embassy. Among the demonstrators was Nobel Peace Prize laureate Rigoberta Mench&lt;U+00FA&gt;.110
South America
Protests took place across South America including, Uruguay where their protest took place on the day before February 15, Friday. An estimated 70,000 people marched down Montevideo's Avenida 18.111 In Brazil, a protest lead by President Luiz In&lt;U+00E1&gt;cio Lula da Silva was attended by 1,500 marchers (Police estimate).112
In Buenos Aires, Argentina, an estimate of 50,000 protesters attended.113
Asia
Areas in Asia with large Muslim populations, in particular the countries Middle East, had the highest levels of opposition to the proposed Iraq war, however demonstrations in many of these countries were relatively small. One United Arab Emirates newspaper Al Bayan led with the statement: &quot;The people of the world and more than one million Europeans demonstrate against an attack on Iraq while the Arab people and their leaders are in a deep coma.&quot;114 The reasons for this are no doubt complex, but one factor that is commonly cited is the suppression of protest movements by the conservative leaders of those countries. A report by Asef Bayat in the Middle East Report suggests that the &quot;the Arab governments allow little room for independent dissent&quot; as is shown by the fact that &quot;Since 2000, demands for collective protests against the US and Israel have been ignored by the authorities&quot; and &quot;unofficial street actions have faced intimidation and assault, with activists being harassed or detained&quot;.115
Middle East
In Iraq, the country in which the war would take place, protesters marched down Palestine Street in Baghdad where several thousand Iraqis many carrying Kalashnikov rifles joined in the global protests. Unlike the vast majority of protests across the world the protest in Baghdad was also in support of the Baathist regime; it was called by Saddam Hussein as &quot;World Anger Day&quot;. Protesters carried posters of Saddam and burned US flags.116
A large protest also took place on the streets of Damascus in Syria which borders Iraq. Protesters chanted anti-U.S. and anti-Israeli slogans while marching to the &quot;People's Assembly&quot; in a demonstration of between 10,000 (GLW estimate) to 200,000 protesters (CBS estimate and USA Today estimate).117 In Lebanon which is also near Iraq, 10,000 protesters (CBS estimate) took part in a demonstration in Beirut. However, the protest ended early when it rained heavily.
Massive Anti-War Outpouring (4th ref)
118 There were also demonstrations of 10,000 people (GLW estimate) in Beirut, Lebanon, and 5000 people (GLW estimate) in Amman, Jordan.119
In Israel there was a demonstration in Tel Aviv of approximately 2,000 (USA Today estimate) to 3,000 people (GLW and WSWS estimate). The demonstration contained both Arabs and Jews. It was organized by a wide range of peace organizations including the Communist Party of Israel, the National Democratic Assembly, the Democratic Arab Party, the Independent Media Center, the Alternative Information Center, Ta'ayush, the Gush Shalom movement, and the Organization for Democratic Action. However, it was boycotted by other left-wing groups, including Peace Now and Meretz.120 The demonstration was co-ordinated with a similar demonstration which took place in Ramallah.121122
Other areas in Asia
Small protests took place across Japan mostly being held outside US military bases. The biggest demonstration of the day took place in 'Shibuya were 5,000 (SW estimate) people marched.123 However, there was a demonstration of 25,000 in Tokyo on Friday, the day before as well as smaller demonstrations in Osaka and other cities. Amongst the protesters in Tokyo was a group of survivors of the 1945 atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki.124
Around 3,000 people (SW estimate) joined an illegal demonstration in the Malaysian city of Kuala Lumpur despite police warnings that any participants in a protest would face stern action. The demonstration ended at the US embassy at Jalan Tun Razak.125 Taiwan had a protest of more than 2,000 people (WSWS estimate) in the capital city of Taipei under the slogan of &lt;U+201C&gt;No Blood for Oil&lt;U+201D&gt;.126
India saw protests across the country including 10,000 (BBC estimate) in Calcutta.127 In Bangladesh 2,000 people joined a demonstration in Dhaka.128
In South Korea there was a demonstration of 2,000 people (WSWS estimate) which took place in the capital city Seoul. The protest started with a rally at Ma-ron-i-ea Park after which there was a demonstration that ended in Jong-Myo Park were the size of the protest increased in size to 3,000 people (WSWS estimate. Jong-Myo Park was surrounded by riot police who almost out numbered the protesters. Protests also took place in the South Korean cites of Pusan, Taegu, Taejon, Kwangju and Wonju.129
No protests were reported as having taken place in mainland China. According to a WSWS correspondent from Beijing there were two factors that explain the lack of protest in mainland China; &quot;[Beijing&lt;U+2019&gt;s] appeasement of imperialism and its fear of any public protest, whatever its content.&quot; There was a demonstration in Hong Kong of up to 1,000 people (WSWS estimate).130
Africa
South Africa
A protest of between 8,000 and 10,000 (AllAfrica.com estimate) and 20,000 people (SW estimate) joined a protest in Johannesburg in South Africa.
 In Cape Town 5,000 (USA Today estimate) to 20,000 protesters (WSWS estimate) joined a demonstration march which started at 10 in the morning on Keizersgracht road and ended at the offices of the US consulate-general which was guarded by a ring of riot police, were there was a rally with speakers. Protests were organised by the Anti-War Coalition and the Stop the War campaign of the Congress of South African Trade Unions (Cosatu).131132
Protests of thousands of people also took place at Durban and Bloemfontein.
A number of prominent ANC politicians attended marches. At the Cape Town rally the South African Minister, Pallo Jordan addressed the protesters saying; &quot;We will stop the war. The voice of the people will be heard.&quot;133
Tunisia
A protest of around 3,000 (SW estimate) in the Tunisian city of Sfax was attacked by police who beat the protesters with batons and truncheons, injuring at least 20.
Oceania
Fiji
Protests on the tiny island of Fiji took place on the day before, on Friday morning, heralding the weekend of demonstrations. Protesters handed floral Valentine's Day messages to the representatives of the US, British and Australian governments urging them to avoid the war.134
Australia
Friday also saw protests in Melbourne, Australia where around 150,000 people (BBC estimate) (Over 200,000 organisers estimate) joined a demonstration.135
On the Saturday protests also took place in Australia&lt;U+2019&gt;s six state capitals with 200,000 protesters (BBC estimate) demonstrating in Sydney, and an estimated 600,000 demonstrating in cities around the country. The Sydney demonstration included a feeder march of 10,000 trade unionists.136
Protests in Australia in Bellingen, New South Wales. Around 2,500 people (SW estimate) joined a rally at the towns sports ground. As well as hearing from speakers the demonstrators were entertained by a group of a cappella singers called 'The Bushbombs'. The rally was about as large as the town's population.137
New Zealand
The first actual demonstration of the day took place in New Zealand where 10,000 people demonstrated in Auckland and Wellington. The Auckland march was bigger then expected forcing police to shut off Queen Street. People were reported to be still starting the march as those at the front of the march reached a rally in Myers Park several kilometres away. In Wellington The march had to carry on after the then planned end point as there were too many people to fit into the park.138
Polar
The extent of the global spread of protest is highlighted by the fact that even the Polar region saw protests with a group of scientists at the US McMurdo Station in Antarctica holding a rally.139140
Effect
At the time, many commentators were hopeful that this global mobilization of unprecedented scale would stop the coming Iraq war. The New York Times writer Patrick Tyler claimed that they showed that there were &quot;two superpowers on the planet - the United States, and worldwide public opinion&quot;.141
The unprecedented size of the demonstrations was widely taken to indicate that the majority of people across the world opposed the war. However, the then pro-war Prime Minister of Australia, John Howard, claimed that the protests were not representative of public opinion, saying &quot;I don't know that you can measure public opinion just by the number of people that turn up at demonstrations&quot;.
The potential effect of the protests was generally dismissed by pro-war politicians; the then US National Security Advisor Condoleezza Rice was reported as saying that the protests would &quot;not affect [the US administration's] determination to confront Saddam Hussein and help the Iraqi people&quot;.142 Her view was borne out as the day of protests, along with the protests that followed it, failed to stop the war. However, the protests and other public opposition have been held up as a key factor in the decisions of the governments of many countries, such as Canada, to not send troops to Iraq.
Though demonstrations against the Iraq war and subsequent occupation have continued none has matched this day in terms of size. One explanation for this that has been suggested is that people have become disillusioned with marching as a political tactic because of the failure of these demonstrations to achieve their explicit aim. In 2006 three years after this day, in an article urging arguing for people to attend a further march, Mike Marqusee put forward two counter arguments to this. Firstly he claimed that it was too soon to judge the long-term significance of the demonstrations noting that &quot;People who took part in the non-cooperation campaigns in India in the 20s and 30s had to wait a long time for independence.&quot; and that &quot;There were eight years of protest and more than 2 million dead before the Vietnam war came to an end&quot;. Secondly, he claimed that while the effect of marching may be uncertain, the effect of not marching would surely be to make it more likely that the occupation would continue.143
According to Alex Callinicos some people argue from the idea that the demonstrations have failed, to the notion that the anti-war movement should concentrate on direct action rather than mass demonstrations. He argues against this claiming that putting pressure on governments not to join in with &quot;Bush&lt;U+2019&gt;s imperial project&quot; requires an expression of opposition of large numbers of people and claims that &quot;scattered, localised direct actions do not provide the necessary visibility&quot; He further claims that &quot;big national demonstrations are also important in sustaining the momentum of the [anti-war] movement&quot;.144
Despite failing in its explicit aim the February 15 global day of anti-war protests had many effects that were not directly intended. According to United Kingdom left-wing anti-war activist Salma Yaqoob, one of these was that they were a powerful antidote to the idea that the war was a &quot;clash of civilizations&quot;, or a religious war, an idea she claimed was propagated both by Western leaders and reactionary forces in the Arab world.145
The British writer Ian McEwan reflected the fact that the day has firmly entered into public consciousness in Britain by using it as the back drop to his novel Saturday.146 The Protests also feature as a backdrop to the music video for U.S. heavy metal band System of a Down's single, &quot;Boom!&quot;.
See also
List of locations which held February 15, 2003 anti-war protests
References
Further information
Stop the War: The story of Britain's biggest mass movement, Andrew Murray and Lindsey German, ISBN 1-905192-00-2
Voices Against War: F15 NYC, Indymedia, DVD
The World Says No to War, Larry Neilson, QuickTime movie
External links
Human shield action to Iraq
Irish Anti War Movement
MoveOn
Not In Our Name
Not In Our Name Project
Pictures of the world wide protest against the war in Iraq and More photos (Login required), and More photos
Stop The War Coalition
United for Peace and Justice
QuickTime movie about the Seattle peace march
Google Video of the 2003 demo. Series of Interviews
es:Protestas anti-guerra del 15 de Febrero de 2003
Category:2003 Iraq conflict Category:Protest marches Category:Protests Category:Stances and opinions regarding the 2003 Iraq conflict
↩
↩
Largest anti-war rally, Guinness Book of world records, 2004↩
President Bush's address to the United Nations, CNN, September 12, 2002↩
This Looming War Isn't About Chemical Warheads or Human Rights: It's About Oil, Robert Fisk, January 18, 2003, The Independent↩
Iraq Poll 2003, Gallup international↩
Anti-war protests do make a difference , Alex Callinicos, Socialist Worker, 19 March 2005.↩
Stefaan Walgrave and Joris Verhulst, The February 15 Worldwide Protests against a War in Iraq: An Empirical Test of Transnational Opportunities. Outline of a Research Programme. (PDF). Draft paper online. p.5. Accessed 24 January 2006. (see Wikipedia:WikiProject Anti-war/An Empirical Test of Transnational Opportunities for permission to quote paper)↩
↩
↩
↩
Organizers of Antiwar Movement Plan to Go Beyond Protests, Glenn Frankel, The Washington Post, March 3 2003↩
Anti-war demonstrators rally around the world, CNN.com, January 19, 2003↩
↩
Stop the War: The story of Britain's biggest mass movement, Andrew Murray and Lindsey German, ISBN 1-905192-00-2↩
Stop the war, Nyier Abdou, Al-Ahram↩
Anti-war protesters fight rally ban, BBC Online News, 31 January 2003↩
Peace march 'to attract 500,000', BBC Online News, 14 February, 2003↩
Protesters join huge anti-war march, BBC online, 15 February 2003↩
One million. And still they came, Euan Ferguson, The Observer, February 16 2003↩
'Million' march against Iraq war, BBC Online News, 16 February 2003↩
Wall and Piece, Bansky, ISBN 1-84413-786-4↩
Stopping the war and beyond, Matthew Tempest, The Guardian, December 22 2003↩
A new era of activism?, Nyta Mann, BBC news, 15 February, 2003↩
[http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/uk/2025526.stm| Million throng for Jubilee finale], BBC News Online, 4 June, 2002↩
February 2003 Poll, ICM, 14-16 February, 2003↩
PsandLove.org Archived site of internet broadcasts from Hyde Park↩
WORLD: Largest coordinated anti-war protest in history, Norm Dixon, Green Left Weekly, February 19 2003↩
The day the clans gathered to say No, Stephen Khan, The Observer, February 16 2003↩
Dublin brought to a halt by march, Henry McDonald and Nicola Byrne, The Observer, February 16 2003↩
Dublin brought to a halt by march, Henry McDonald and Nicola Byrne, The Observer, February 16 2003↩
Voices from the world's biggest anti-war protest, Socialist Worker, Issue no. 1839, 22 February 2003↩
Thousands back Belfast anti-war rally, BBC online, 15 February 2003↩
The Day the world said no (2nd ref)↩
Largest anti-war rally (second ref)↩
[Largest coordinated anti-war protest in history (Second ref)↩
Anti-war protesters hold global rallies, USA Today, 2/16/2003↩
Dublin brought to a halt by march (Second ref)↩
Mass demonstrations inaugurate international antiwar movement, Chris Marsden, WSWS, 17 February 2003↩
Anti-war protesters hold global rallies, USA Today, 2/16/2003↩
Voices from the world's biggest anti-war protest (Second ref)↩
Cities jammed in worldwide protest of war in Iraq, CNN.com, February 16 2003↩
Waging Peace on the Brink of War (Second ref)↩
Massive Anti-War Outpouring, CBS↩
[Largest coordinated anti-war protest in history (3rd ref)↩
Anti-war protesters hold global rallies (fourth ref)↩
Anti-war protesters hold global rallies (5th ref)↩
Spanish Yahoo news article ? link no longer goes to article.↩
Mass demonstrations inaugurate international antiwar movement (2nd ref)↩
ABC website article not in English, This is used as a reference for Austria march↩
Voices from the world's biggest anti-war protest (3rd ref)↩
Voices from the world's biggest anti-war protest (4th ref)↩
Mass demonstrations inaugurate international antiwar movement (3rd ref)↩
Anti-war protesters hold global rallies (6th ref)↩
[Largest coordinated anti-war protest in history (4th ref)↩
Mass demonstrations inaugurate international antiwar movement (4th ref)↩
Anti-war protesters hold global rallies (7th ref)↩
Anti-war protesters hold global rallies (8th ref)↩
Voices from the world's biggest anti-war protest (5th ref)↩
Nein zum Krieg gegen Irak - Kein Blut f&lt;U+00FC&gt;r &lt;U+00D6&gt;l!, GSoA, Not in English, Used as reference for Switzerland demonstration↩
1, TV Slovenia, in Slovenian↩
Mass demonstrations inaugurate international antiwar movement (5th ref)↩
Mass demonstrations inaugurate international antiwar movement (6th ref)↩
Anti-war protesters hold global rallies (third ref)↩
Voices from the world's biggest anti-war protest (6th ref)↩
The Day the world said no (3rd ref)↩
Mass demonstrations inaugurate international antiwar movement (7th ref)↩
Mass demonstrations inaugurate international antiwar movement (8th ref)↩
Anti-war protesters hold global rallies (9th ref)↩
RE-COLONIZING IRAQ, Tariq Ali, New Left Review, May-June 2003↩
RE-COLONIZING IRAQ (2nd ref)↩
Voices from the world's biggest anti-war protest (7th ref)↩
Cities jammed in worldwide protest of war in Iraq (2nd ref)↩
Voices from the world's biggest anti-war protest (8th ref)↩
Anti-war protesters hold global rallies (10th ref)↩
Mass demonstrations inaugurate international antiwar movement (9th ref)↩
[Largest coordinated anti-war protest in history (5th ref)↩
The Day the world said no (4th ref)↩
Mass demonstrations inaugurate international antiwar movement (10th ref)↩
Mass demonstrations inaugurate international antiwar movement (11th ref)↩
Cities jammed in worldwide protest of war in Iraq (3rd ref)↩
US joins anti-war protests, BBC Online News, 15 February 2003↩
The Anti-War Protest And The Police, Julia Vitullo-Martin, Gotham Gazette; New York city news and policy, March 2003↩
New Yorkers join anti-war protests, BBC Online News, 15 February 2003↩
Cities jammed in worldwide protest of war in Iraq (4th ref)↩
Mass demonstrations inaugurate international antiwar movement (12th ref)↩
Millions join anti-war protests worldwide (2nd REF)↩
The Anti-War Protest And The Police (2nd ref)↩
Cities jammed in worldwide protest of war in Iraq (5th ref)↩
Lyrics of Old Soul Song (For The New World Order) by Conor Oberst↩
Mass demonstrations inaugurate international antiwar movement (13th ref)↩
U.S. sees protests big and small, CNN.com, February 15 2003↩
San Francisco ends world peace rallies, BBC Online News, 17 February 2003↩
Photos show 65,000 at peak of S.F. rally Aerial study casts doubt on estimates of 200,000, Wyatt Buchanan, San Francisco Chronicle, February 21 2003↩
Statement From Feb. 16 Anti-War Coalitions Regarding Rabbi Michael Lerner, February 11 2003.↩
Cities jammed in worldwide protest of war in Iraq (6th ref)↩
U.S. sees protests big and small (2nd ref)↩
The World Says No to War, Larry Neilson, Director's Cut,2/15/03, 10 min, 19MB↩
U.S. sees protests big and small (3rd ref)↩
[Largest coordinated anti-war protest in history (... ref)↩
Florida Protesters Bare All Against War in Iraq, Palm Beach Post, February 15, 2003.↩
Anti-war protesters hold global rallies (11th ref)↩
Anti-war protesters hold global rallies (12th ref)↩
Reports on February 14-16 antiwar demonstrations, WSWS, 21 February 2003↩
Anti-war protesters hold global rallies (... ref)↩
Notes on the Numbers, Gary Leupp, CounterPunch↩
Dublin brought to a halt by march (3rd ref)↩
The &quot;Street&quot; and the Politics of Dissent in the Arab World, Asef Bayat, Middle east report, Spring 2003↩
Waging Peace on the Brink of War (3rd ref)↩
Massive Anti-War Outpouring (3rd ref)↩
Largest coordinated anti-war protest in history (7th ref)↩
[Largest coordinated anti-war protest in history (8th ref)↩
3,000 march in Tel Aviv WSWS↩
Largest coordinated anti-war protest in history (9th ref)↩
Anti-war protesters hold global rallies (14 ref)↩
Voices from the world's biggest anti-war protest (9th ref)↩
Antiwar marchers defy large police presence in Seoul, WSWS, 17 February 2003↩
Voices from the world's biggest anti-war protest (10th ref)↩
Antiwar marchers defy large police presence in Seoul (2nd ref)↩
Millions join anti-war protests worldwide (3rd REF)↩
Anti-war protesters hold global rallies (15th ref)↩
Antiwar marchers defy large police presence in Seoul (3rd ref)↩
Antiwar marchers defy large police presence in Seoul (4th ref)↩
Tens of thousands march in South Africa against Iraq war, Eric Graham, WSWS, 18 February 2003↩
Anti-war protesters hold global rallies (16th ref)↩
Anti-War Marches in Four Cities, SA Sends Mission to Iraq, AllAfrica.com, February 18, 2003↩
↩
↩
↩
Threats and Responses: News Analysis; A New Power In the Streets (requires purchase to access), The New York Times, Patrick Tyler, February 17 2003↩
Waging Peace on the Brink of War (4th ref)↩
Reasons to March, Mike Marqusee, UK Watch, March 16 2006↩
Anti-war protests do make a difference (2nd Ref)↩
Global and local echoes of the anti-war movement: a British Muslim perspective, Salma Yaqoob, International Socialist Journal, Issue: 100↩
Anti-war protests do make a difference (3rd Ref)↩
