Syd Dale (20 May 1924 in York – 15 August 1994) was an English self-taught composer and arranger of funk, easy listening and library music. His music played an important role on TV, radio and advertising media of the 1960s and 1970s and is still used.
Biography
Dale started as an apprentice engineer at Rowntree's chocolate factory at 16. Soon big band music, very popular in the 1940s, became his passion. He spent as much time as possible listening to the Big Bands and studying the arrangements. Three years later, in 1945, he left the factory and joined several local bands as pianist and arranger.
His music, which emphasized melody and harmony with intricate arrangements, was composed for many television and radio projects. He was musical director on Oh Boy, Six-Five Special and Braden's Week. He had also co-arranged and co-produced some 007 themes as many other commercial successes. Another of his many production music pieces, the bongo drum and harpsichord-driven &quot;Cuban Presto&quot; (originally released on the 1966 KPM album Accent on Percussion), was used by WPIX (Channel 11) in New York City as the theme for its late-night movie show, The Channel 11 Film Festival, from the late 1960s to the 1980s. 1, 2
In 1971, he founded Amphonic Music record label, with the purpose of recording and producing his compositions and supplying music to the TV, film and radio business.
In the mid-1970s, he released a track for the disco/teen market called &quot;The Flasher&quot;, creating a dance craze of skipping backwards and forwards on the dance floor widely demonstrated at Spenborough Youth Club, West Yorkshire.
Through the 1970s and 1980s his &quot;The Hellraisers&quot; composition was used as the theme music to the BBC World Service Outlook topical programme.
In the 1970s, another composition of Dale's, &quot;Walk and Talk&quot;, was used as the introductory music to the BBC's transmitter information, usually broadcast on BBC 2 in the mornings.3,4.
His music is still used in productions today. For example, his &quot;Beauty Parade&quot; was used in the SpongeBob SquarePants episode &quot;Spy Buddies&quot; when Plankton get all of the customers out of Mr. Krabs's restaurant, the Krusty Krab. Plankton played it very loudly while flying over the Krusty Krab in his blimp. In the TV comedy series Episodes, the tune &quot;Two Time&quot; is the ringtone on Matt Leblanc's iPhone. &quot;Man Friday&quot; was used as the theme tune to LWT's Tarrant on TV; and in the episode of &quot;Speed 3&quot; with Milkman Pat Mustard, in Father Ted.
Dale's tracks have been widely used by NFL Films over some four decades; his track &quot;Artful Dodger&quot; is given prominent use in such films as the official film recapping Super Bowl V.
Discography
The following list is only a small sample of his work.
The Penthouse Suite
Walk and Talk
LPs
The Sounds Of Syd Dale (1966)
Impact And Action (1967)
Flamboyant Themes - Vol. II (1968)
Impact &amp; Action - Vol. 2 (1970)
''Love Isn't Just For The Young Various Volumes
Post-Mortem Compilations
Syd Dale: Retro
Kitsch UK
Cinemaphonic Soul Punch
Swinging 60's
Cocktail Lounge
''Dusty Fingers Volume 13
References
SydDale
Amphonic Music Ltd
Syd Dale and Amphonic Music
Interview with Syd Dale's son, Ian Dale
Online Store of 60s &amp; 70s Soundtracks and Library Music
&quot;Score, Baby!&quot; - Sound Library
Soundtrack Collector
Category:1924 births Category:1994 deaths Category:English composers Category:People from York Category:NFL Films
