Michael Alfred &quot;Mike&quot; Warnke (born November 19, 1946, in Evansville, Indiana) is a Christian evangelist and comedian who became one of evangelical Christianity's best-known experts on the subject of Satanism before his story of having been a Satanist high priest was debunked in 1991 by the Christian magazine Cornerstone.
Early life
Warnke was the son of Alfred &quot;Al&quot; Warnke and Louise Warnke. When he was five years old, the family moved to Manchester, Tennessee, where Al opened a truck stop. In 1955, Warnke's mother was killed in a car accident. In 1958 his father died, leaving Mike an orphan. Mike was first taken to live with two of his aunts in Sparta, Tennessee, and from there to his father's half-sister and her husband in San Bernardino, California. He graduated from Rim of the World High School in Lake Arrowhead in June 1965. In September, he enrolled at San Bernardino Valley College but withdrew after one semester, whereupon, by his account, he began his tenure as a Satanist. On June 2, 1966, Warnke enlisted in the United States Navy as a hospital corpsman.1
According to Warnke's account in The Satan Seller, his religious experience came during his tenure in the Navy, on August 27, 1966, and he converted to Christianity (an account later proven to be a lie). Returning from recruit training, Warnke began dating fellow Rim High alumna Sue Studer. The following year, Warnke completed his naval medic training and returned to San Diego, where he married Studer. In 1969, Warnke was sent to Vietnam for a six-month tour of duty2 where he won a Purple Heart, but spent much time detained, allegedly killed a man, and was shot several times. He returned to the United States in 1970.3
While still in the service of the Navy, Warnke teamed up with San Diego evangelist Morris Cerullo and was touted for his &quot;Satanist experience&quot;. Warnke and Cerullo toured the country participating in charismatic Revival meetings. Cerullo wanted to write a book about youth occultism, and assigned the writing task to David Balsiger with help from Warnke. In early 1972, Warnke requested and received an early discharge from the Navy as a conscientious objector so that he could work full-time in the ministry. Warnke then left Cerullo's ministry to start his own, forbidding Cerullo to use any of his material, and he and Balsiger went on to write the book that would make Warnke famous.4
Rise to fame
The Satan Seller
In 1973, Warnke's book The Satan Seller was released. It was written by Warnke with help from Balsiger and Les Jones and tells of Warnke's orphaned childhood and his introduction into Satanism. It details Warnke's participation in sexual orgies, alcoholism, and drug dealing; his rise in the ranks of Satanism to the level of &quot;high priest&quot;; presiding over Satanic rituals including magical spells, summoning demons, ritual sex including a ritual kidnap and rape; the attempt on his life — a heroin overdose — that left him angry and disillusioned; his heroism in Vietnam; and how he found Jesus and came home as an evangelist. The story ends with Warnke living happily in California with wife Sue Studer. In fewer than three months after the release, The Satan Seller had become a religious best-seller.5
The book launched Warnke into stardom within evangelical Christian communities. He became a popular speaker at Christian meeting places such as Melodyland in Anaheim, California. In 1974, Warnke moved his family to attend Trinity Bible College in Tulsa, Oklahoma, for a nine-month preparation for ministry. It was here that among other charismatic Christians and recent converts preparing for a life of ministry, Warnke met Carolyn Alberty, with whom Warnke began an affair.6 Warnke also met Elijah Coady, an independent, schismatic bishop of the Syro-Chaldean Church, also known as the Assyrian Church of the East. Coady ordained Warnke as a deacon. Upon graduation, Warnke was again ordained, and Warnke moved with his family to Denver, Colorado.7
Recordings and wives
In November 1975 at an Indiana coffeehouse, Warnke's talk about his conversion from Satanism to Christianity was incidentally recorded. This recording became Warnke's first album, Alive, which was soon widely played on Christian radio. Later that same year, despite interventions from pastors and other acclaimed ministers, Warnke left Sue for Carolyn and filed for divorce. Four months after the divorce was finalized in December, Warnke married Carolyn.8
Warnke's popularity earned him the cover of the September 1976 issue of Harmony, a prominent Christian magazine in the 1970s. In 1977, Warnke released his second album, Jester In The King's Court. In 1978, Warnke recounted his Vietnam experiences on his third album, Hey, Doc!. His albums became &quot;the most popular Christian comedy albums ever produced&quot;.9 During a tour to Hazard, Kentucky, Warnke met Rose Hall, a thrice-divorced mother of three, and began courting her while still married to and together with Carolyn. That marriage came to an end when, as Cornerstone quotes10 Carolyn: &quot;[Warnke] threw me into a wall and split my head open. He said, 'If you go to a local hospital and tell them what your name is, I'll kill you.'&quot; Carolyn fled to Florida. By November 1979, their divorce was final, and Mike moved to Rose's farm in Kentucky. On January 2, 1980, Warnke and Rose married.11
Warnke and his label, Word Records, feuded over an album which he eventually produced and distributed on his own, ''A Christian's Perspective on Halloween '' (1979). Word Records and Warnke reconciled by 1981, resulting in Coming Home (1981), and now including wife Rose, Higher Education (1982) and Growing Up (1983). Then under Word's Dayspring label, he released (solo) Stuff Happens (1985), Good News Tonight (1986), One In A Million (1988), Live ... Totally Weird (1989).1213 Warnke also made a VHS home video, Do You Hear Me? (1989).
During the 1980s, Warnke's and Rose's ministry prospered, as they toured and performed together and raised millions of dollars for their ministry; contributions to the ministry were over $1 million in 1985, and over $2 million in each year from 1987 through 1990.14 As the Warnke's popularity waxed, their personal relationship waned. In 1984, Rose wrote &quot;Satan provided a woman to fill the gap in Michael's life.&quot;15 They separated in 1989 and divorced in 1991. Six weeks after the divorce was finalized, Warnke married former Rim High alum and current wife, Susan Patton.16
Extravagant claims
In 1982, Warnke began to exaggerate his achievements. For instance, during the 1980s Warnke's claims of academic degrees increased from two Bachelor's degrees to two Master's Degrees to a Doctorate of Philosophy. In The Satan Seller, Warnke claims to have been wounded twice while in Vietnam. In Hitchhiking on Hope Street, that number was raised to five.17 Warnke followed up his interest in the Syro-Chaldean tradition and his 1978/1979 ordination as a deacon with a 1983 ordination by independent bishop Richard Morrill, lately of the Byzantine Catholic Church, Inc. This allowed Warnke to call himself a bishop.18
National exposure
Warnke received national coverage when he appeared on the first major news report on Satanism (broadcast in May 16 1985), by ABC&lt;U+2019&gt;s 20/20. In the report titled &quot;The Devil Worshippers&quot;, Warnke appeared in a number of different segments discussing the implements and clothing used in Satanic ceremonies, a scar allegedly indicating where he was repeatedly cut so that his blood could be used in Satanic ceremonies, and what drew him to Satanism.19 After Warnke's appearance on 20/20, he became a well-paid expert on Satanism. He was frequently cited as an expert on the occult by Christian radio host Bob Larson and the Chick Publications stable of authors.
Investigation, debunking and disgrace
In 1991, Cornerstone magazine launched an investigation into Warnke's life and testimony. The previous year, that magazine had debunked the story recounted in Satan's Underground, by Lauren Stratford who claimed her deep involvement in Satanism led her to partake in a ritual in which her own child was sacrificed. After this expos&lt;U+00E9&gt;, which showed that Stratford's alleged child never existed, Cornerstone journalists Mike Hertenstein and Jon Trott investigated Warnke. They investigated Warnke's life, from interviews with over 100 personal friends and acquaintances, to his ministry's tax receipts. Their investigation turned up damaging evidence of fraud and deceit.
The investigation revealed pictures of Warnke taken during the precise time of his alleged status as a Satanist priest. Instead of an emaciated drug-addict sporting long fingernails and waist-length hair, the pictures showed Warnke to be a typical 'square' of the mid-1960s. The investigation refuted, for instance, Warnke's claims that he and mass-murderer Charles Manson had attended a Satanic ritual — Manson was in federal prison at the time (and had no known ties to any Satanic churches). It uncovered that before even joining the Navy, where Warnke claims to have converted, he had been involved with a college Christian ministry, Campus Crusade for Christ. The investigation also revealed the unflattering circumstances surrounding Warnke's multiple marriages, affairs, and divorces. Most critically, however, the investigation showed how Warnke could not possibly have done the many things he claimed to have done throughout the alleged nine months he was a Satanist, much less become a drug-addicted dealer or a Satanic high priest.20
Before publishing the article, Cornerstone contacted Warnke for an interview, but he and Cornerstone could not agree to the terms of an interview.2122 In June 1992, at the annual Christian Booksellers' Association convention, Cornerstone revealed its story.
Aftermath
Warnke sent a response to Cornerstone,23 published in July, insisting he told the truth, stating:  Despite these assertions, Warnke did not provide the name of a single Satanist but used invectives against ex-wife Carolyn.24 In the ensuing months, Warnke conceded parts of the allegations, telling Christianity Today that there had been only 13 members of his coven, not 1,500 as originally claimed, and that of those 13, the whereabouts of five were unknown to him, while the other eight had since died.25
Public response was varied, but nevertheless overwhelmingly against Warnke.26 Initially, Word Records stated they would stand by their artist. However, further investigations by local Kentucky reporters at the Lexington Herald-Leader revealed that Warnke's ministry had engaged in financial misdeeds and that &quot;Mike, his ex-wife Rose, and her brother Neale [Hall] received a total of $809,680 in salary at a time when the ministry newsletter claimed donations were down and more funds were needed.&quot;27 One week later, Word Records dropped Warnke from its label. Finally, on September 30, 1992, fewer than 100 days after the investigation was made public, Warnke Ministries closed its doors.28
In the spring of 1993, Warnke submitted to the authority of an assembly of ministers &quot;acting as elders,&quot; acknowledging his &quot;ungodliness,&quot; his &quot;multiple divorces,&quot; his &quot;failure as husband, father, and friend&quot;, and of &quot;embellishment and exaggeration ... in an attempt ... to entertain,&quot; and offering to pay back taxes to the federal government. The group recommended specific changes to the ministry, including a salary cap and accountability reports.29 Nonetheless, he continued to &quot;stand by [his] testimony of former Satanic involvement&quot;30 stating in an 2000 interview with the Daily Oklahoman, &quot;Exaggeration did creep into some of my stories, but my testimony is still my testimony.&quot;3132 As of 2006, a letter posted on Warnke's web site indicated the group had released him as having met their accountability requirements.33
Warnke suffered a heart attack in 1997. In 2000, he began attempting a comeback, limited to small churches in Kentucky. In 2002, he published Friendly Fire: A Recovery Guide for Believers Battered by Religion (ISBN 0-7684-2124-1), an account of what he perceived as his unfair treatment by fellow Christians in the wake of the Cornerstone expos&lt;U+00E9&gt;.34 By 2004, he was making occasional performing appearances at churches around the country, often referred to simply as &quot;Christian comedian Mike Warnke,&quot;353637 and sometimes as a former Satanic priest383940 although some mentions in the news referred to the Cornerstone expos&lt;U+00E9&gt;.41
References
Further reading
Mike Hertenstein, Jon Trott: Selling Satan: The Tragic History of Mike Warnke (ISBN 0-940895-07-2), Cornerstone Press 1993. An expanded, book-length version of the Cornerstone expos&lt;U+00E9&gt; by the original journalists.
External links
Mike Warnke and Celebrations of Hope, official website
The Cornerstone series on Mike Warnke by Mike Hertenstein and Jon Trott
Category:1946 births Category:American military personnel of the Vietnam War Category:Christian evangelicalism Category:Impostors Category:Living people Category:People from Evansville, Indiana Category:People from Kentucky Category:People from Tennessee Category:People from the Riverside-San Bernardino Area Category:Religious scandals  Category:United States Navy sailors Category:Hoaxes in the United States
↩
Cornerstone, issue 98: &quot;Records show Warnke was in Vietnam for only six months&quot;↩
As quoted in Cornerstone issue 98: {{ citation |title = When Mike Warnke Speaks, the World Listens! |periodical = Contemporary Christian Music |date = 1979-02-26}}↩
The Exhaustive Christian Music Discography: W↩
W - Complete Alphabetical Christian Music catalogue listing: Sweet Christian Music - Celebrating Our 10th Year Shipping WorldWide!↩
As cited by Cornerstone expose: {{ cite book |author = Rose Hall Warnke |coauthors = Joan Hake Robie |isbn = 0914984039 | title = The Great Pretender |location= Lancaster, PA |publisher = Starburst Publishers | year = 1985}}↩
↩
↩
{{ cite web |url = http://www.cornerstonemag.com/features/iss098/warnke_response/csr0009a.htm |date=1992-07-15 |title = Warnke's statement in response to Cornerstone's claims |work = Cornerstone}}↩
Jay Grelen. &quot;Christian comedian says he lied about coven,&quot; Lexington Herald-Leader, November 3, 1992, page B1.↩
↩
Jay Grelen. &quot;Christian comedian set to close doors of troubled ministry,&quot; Lexington Herald-Leader (KY), September 30, 1992, page C13.↩
Tamie Ross. &quot;Laughs stopped for Christian comic: Mike Warnke offers fans new outlook after ministry's crash,&quot; The Daily Oklahoman, September 30, 2000, page 1B↩
Warnke's 1993 statement of apology and repentance↩
&quot;Local notes - Controversial comedian,&quot; The Modesto Bee (CA), February 2, 2002, page G1: &quot;Mike Warnke, a popular 1970s Christian comedian later accused of fabricating claims about his Satanist past, will speak at Pentecostal Church of God Friday through February 10. ... It is unlikely he will talk about his colorful past, said Hughson Pastor Roy Little. Warnke speaks these days about his current Christian faith.&quot;↩
Monique H. Henderson. &quot;Spotlight: Christian comedian Mike Warnke comes to Rancho Mirage: his humor is in the past,&quot; The Press-Enterprise (Riverside, CA), October 3 2007, page B2.↩
&quot;This week&quot; (local events column), Springfield News-Leader (MO), September 15, 2007, page 2C: &quot;Shoal Creek Revival Church ... Christian comedian Mike Warnke 7 p.m. today and 10 a.m. and 6 p.m. Sunday.&quot;↩
Carol Reiter. &quot;Around Town: Walk for health care&quot; (local events column), The Merced Sun-Star (CA), April 14, 2007: &quot;Calvary Temple Worship Center, ... will present Mike Warnke ... . Warnke will share his life experiences from more than 35 years in World Wide Ministry.&quot;↩
&quot;Access religion&quot; (local events column), The Oklahoman (Oklahoma City, OK), August 19, 2006, page 2E: &quot;First Assembly of God of Guthrie, Christian comedian Mike Warnke ... .&quot;↩
Staff reports. &quot;Ex-hippie employs comedy to spread God's word,&quot; El Paso Times (TX), October 15, 2004, page 1D: ''&quot;According to his Web site, Warnke was a satanic high priest...&quot;...↩
&quot;Religion calendar,&quot; St. Petersburg Times (FL), October 21, 2006, PASCO TIMES section, page 5.↩
Barbara Hale. &quot;Around town: Mike Warnke entertains,&quot; The Merced Sun-Star (CA), August 3, 2006, page 2: &quot;A man who has spent 34 years ministering to the lost and brokenhearted is coming to Merced to share his comedic style that gains the attention of listeners. The speaker is Mike Warnke, an ex-satanist high priest, hippie, drug addict, pusher and Naval hospital corpsman attached to a U.S. Marine Corps unit in Vietnam. ...&quot;↩
