The Mask (also known as Eyes of Hell) is a 1961 low-budget Canadian horror film produced in 3-D by Warner Bros. It was directed by Julian Roffman, and stars Paul Stevens, Claudette Nevins and Bill Walker.
Plot summary
The story concerns a young scientist, Dr. Allen Barnes (Stevens), who obtains a mysterious ancient tribal mask. Whenever he puts on the mask, Barnes experiences weird dream-like visions which become increasingly disturbing and violent. The visions begin to alter Barnes' personality, and eventually drive him insane.
The premise bears some similarity to The Mask comic book series later initiated by Dark Horse Comics in 1987, and to the 1994 feature The Mask starring Jim Carrey, which was based on the comic books. 
&quot;Put the mask on, NOW!&quot;
The Mask is notable chiefly for its surreal use of 3-D cinematography.
Most of the story is presented in conventional black-and-white. However, whenever Dr. Barnes is about to put on the mask, Barnes' voice (heavily processed with reverb) urges the viewer to &quot;Put the mask on, NOW!&quot; This was the cue for theatergoers to put on the red/green 3-D glasses (shaped like masks) which they were given upon entering the theater. The terrifying visions experienced by Dr. Barnes were then presented in anaglyphic 3-D.
The 3-D sequences, four in all, last only a few minutes each. They were designed by montage expert Slavko Vorkapich, and feature an array of distinctively psychedelic visuals, some of which are mildly gruesome. A crude electronic music score (billed as &quot;Electro Magic Sound&quot; in publicity materials) enhances the strangeness of the 3-D scenes.
Video release
The 3-D effects in The Mask come across unusually well when shown on television, making it one of the better examples of anaglyphic 3-D video available.
The Mask was frequently exhibited in 3-D on US broadcast and cable TV in the 1980s. It has also been issued in 3-D on both VHS and LaserDisc home video formats. As of 2006, it has yet to receive an authorized release on DVD.
Mask (1961), The Mask (1961), The Mask (1961), The Mask (1961), The Mask (1961), The
