Swen Eric Nater (born January 14, 1950 in Den Helder, Netherlands) is a retired Dutch professional basketball player, primarily in the American Basketball Association (ABA) and National Basketball Association (NBA). He is the only player to have led both the NBA and ABA in rebounding. Nater was a two-time ABA All-Star and was the 1974 ABA Rookie of the Year. He played college basketball for the UCLA Bruins, winning two National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA) titles.
Basketball career
Nater helped John Wooden's UCLA Bruins win two NCAA titles. He was a backup to Bill Walton, and he never started a collegiate game.12
Nater was drafted by The Floridians in the 1972 ABA Draft, and then by the Virginia Squires in the June 1972 ABA dispersal draft after the Floridians' demise.34 Nater was also drafted in the first round of the 1973 NBA Draft by the Milwaukee Bucks but in August 1973 opted to sign with the Virginia Squires of the ABA.5 On November 21, 1973 the Squires traded Nater to the San Antonio Spurs for a draft pick and $300,000.6
With the Spurs Nater was the American Basketball Association Rookie of the Year in 1974,7 led the ABA in field goal percentage in 1974, and led the ABA in rebounding in 1975. He was named to the All-ABA Second Team in 1974 and 1975, and participated in the ABA All-Star Game both seasons.8 During his three seasons in the ABA, Nater played for the San Antonio Spurs, the Virginia Squires, and the New York Nets.
Nater's NBA career began with the Milwaukee Bucks, and he was traded after one season to the Buffalo Braves. When the Braves played in San Diego, Nater became a local favorite. Nater led the NBA in rebounding average during the 1979-80 season, making him the only player ever to lead both the NBA and ABA in rebounding.9
Before the 1983-84 season, Nater was traded by the Clippers along with a just-drafted Byron Scott to the Los Angeles Lakers for Norm Nixon, Eddie Jordan, and a 1986 second-round draft pick (which would eventually be dealt to the Phoenix Suns and become Jeff Hornacek). Nater and Scott helped lead the Lakers to the NBA Finals that year, after which Nater retired as a player.
After NBA
He built the basketball program Christian Heritage College in San Diego, California, and coached from 1985 to 1995.10 He left the position because it &quot;was high on work and low on pay&quot; for employment at Costco.11 As of 2010 he was still working there.12 Nater has also co-authored books with legendary basketball coaches Wooden and Pete Newell.
Publications
See also
List of National Basketball Association players with most rebounds in a game
References
External links
Category:1950 births Category:Living people Category:Dutch basketball players Category:Dutch expatriate basketball people in the United States Category:Junior college men's basketball players in the United States Category:UCLA Bruins men's basketball players Category:San Antonio Spurs players Category:New York Nets players Category:Milwaukee Bucks draft picks Category:Milwaukee Bucks players Category:Buffalo Braves players Category:Miami Floridians draft picks Category:Virginia Squires draft picks Category:Virginia Squires players Category:San Diego Clippers players Category:Los Angeles Lakers players Category:Power forwards (basketball) Category:Wilson Classical High School alumni Category:People from Den Helder
Dan Raley, Where Are They Now?, Seattle Post Intelligencer, January 9, 2008↩
↩
BasketballReference.com Swen Nater page↩
RememberTheABA.com Virginia Squires detailed year by year notes page↩
↩
