&quot;End Game&quot; is the seventeenth episode of the second season of the American science fiction television series The X-Files. It premiered on the Fox network on . It was directed by Rob Bowman, and written by Frank Spotnitz. &quot;End Game&quot; featured guest appearances by Megan Leitch, Peter Donat and Brian Thompson, saw Steven Williams reprise his role as X. The episode is one of those which helped to explore the series' overarching mythology. &quot;End Game&quot; earned a Nielsen household rating of 11.2, being watched by 10.7 million people in its initial broadcast.
After FBI special agent Dana Scully (Gillian Anderson) is kidnapped by an alien bounty hunter, her partner Fox Mulder (David Duchovny) offers his sister Samantha (Leitch) forward as a ransom. However, Samantha is merely one of several clones created as part of a human-alien hybrid project, leading Mulder to pursue the bounty hunter for the truth about her disappearance. &quot;End Game&quot; is a two-part episode, continuing the plot from the previous episode, &quot;Colony&quot;.
Plot
USS Allegiance, a nuclear submarine patrolling the Beaufort Sea off the coast of Alaska, comes across a craft below the ice that is emitting a radio signal. The Allegiance is ordered to fire upon the craft by Pacific Command. However, the craft manages to disable the sub, stranding it far below the ice.
Following on from the cliffhanger ending in &quot;Colony&quot;, Dana Scully (Gillian Anderson) is beaten and kidnapped by &quot;Mulder&quot;, who is really the Bounty Hunter in disguise. When the real Mulder (David Duchovny) finds the wrecked hotel room, his sister Samantha explains that the Bounty Hunter will set up a hostage exchange to swap Scully for her. She further explains that the Bounty Hunter can only be killed by piercing the back of his neck, and that his toxic alien blood is deadly to humans. Finally, Samantha reveals that the Gregors are the progeny of two original aliens, and worked at abortion clinics to gain access to fetal tissue. Their objective was to set up an extraterrestrial colony on Earth, an effort that has gone as far back as the 1940s. However, because the Gregors' experiments were considered to have tainted their alien race, the Bounty Hunter was sent to kill them.
Walter Skinner meets Mulder and Samantha at his apartment, telling them that the remaining Gregors are missing. Mulder receives a call from Scully, who tells him that the Bounty Hunter seeks an exchange for Samantha. Mulder and Samantha are sent to a bridge near Bethesda, while Skinner hides nearby with a sharpshooter. After the exchange takes place, Samantha attacks the Bounty Hunter. During the struggle, the sharpshooter fires upon the Bounty Hunter, and both he and Samantha fall into a river. An anguished Mulder tearfully apologizes to his father, Bill, for losing her again. His father leaves him a note from Samantha, which provides Mulder with the address of a Rockville, Maryland clinic where they can meet if separated. Mulder hopes that she is alive, but soon gets a call from Scully reporting that Samantha's body has been found. After Scully ends the call, she discovers Samantha's body dissolving into a green liquid.
Meanwhile, upon entering the clinic, Mulder finds multiple clones of Samantha working on fetuses in labs similar to that of the Gregors. They reveal that they manipulated Mulder by sending one of their own to pose as &quot;Samantha&quot; in an effort to have him protect her original clone. They also claim to know the real Samantha's location. Mulder, realizing he has been duped, initially refuses to help and attempts to leave, but is confronted by the arriving Bounty Hunter. The Bounty Hunter knocks Mulder unconscious, proceeding to kill the Samantha clones and burn down the clinic. When no trace of the clones are found, Mulder meets with X at the Kennedy Center, demanding to know the Bounty Hunter's location. X says that the Bounty Hunter's craft below the Beaufort Sea has been found, and that a naval fleet has been sent to destroy it. Mulder heads there, and e-mails Scully to tell her not to follow him.
Scully goes to Skinner for help, but he initially refuses. Scully also summons X to Mulder's apartment, but he also refuses to provide her with information. On his way out, X is confronted by Skinner in an elevator. After the two men get into a vicious physical altercation, X divulges Mulder's whereabouts. Meanwhile, Mulder finds the stranded Allegiance, with its sail broken through a patch of shallow ice. Inside, he finds that the sub's crew have all been killed. He comes across the apparent sole survivor, whom Mulder correctly guesses to be the disguised Bounty Hunter. Mulder handcuffs him and places him at gunpoint, demanding to know where Samantha is. The two get into a struggle, during which Mulder becomes exposed to the Bounty Hunter's blood. The Bounty Hunter claims that Samantha is still alive before dumping Mulder off the sail. He then submerges the Allegiance, nearly cutting Mulder in half with the sub's diving plane in the process. Mulder is rushed to the field hospital seen at the beginning of &quot;Colony&quot;, where Scully&lt;U+2014&gt;having learned that the alien blood contains a retrovirus that dies in cold temperatures &lt;U+2014&gt; convinces the doctors to keep him in an ice tub, saving his life.
As Mulder's condition stabilizes, Scully writes a field report crediting science with detecting the retrovirus and saving Mulder's life. She contends that the retrovirus is of a mysterious origin, and reports that neither the Bounty Hunter nor the Allegiance have been found. When Mulder gains consciousness, he tells Scully that his experiences did not give him the answers he had been searching for, but that they have given him renewed &quot;faith to keep looking&quot;.12
Production
Writing
This was the first episode ever written by Frank Spotnitz.3 Spotnitz, who came up with the idea to bring back Samantha Mulder in &quot;Colony&quot;, wrote this episode, his first credited work on the show.4 According to Spotnitz, he along with Chris Carter, were overly ambitious when writing this episode.5 Since this was Spotnitz's debut as a television writer, he got significant help from Carter to put the script together.6 All of the scenes originally pitched by Spotnitz were kept with the exception of a car chase scene that ended with a crash, and one in which Mulder mistakes a federal marshal for the bounty hunter. The scenes were cut due to time restraints during filming.7
It turned out in this episode that the Samantha Mulder (Megan Leitch) who appeared was a clone.8 Carter did not want it to be the real Samantha since that would have been &quot;straight science fiction&quot; and it was too &quot;ridiculous&quot; to give too many answers.9 Spotnitz further explained that the production crew never saw The X-Files as a &quot;science fiction show&quot;, but more of a show that incorporated science fiction and that this and previous episode &quot;Colony&quot; were more of a &quot;suspense thriller&quot; than any other genre.10
Filming
Chris Carter described the &quot;Colony&quot; and &quot;End Game&quot; two-parter as the &quot;backbone of the show, the romantic quest of Mulder for the truth and Scully as well&quot;, and that it led Scully to believe in the conspiracy.11
The motel scene with the bounty hunter and Dana Scully was shot on a sound stage in Vancouver, Canada in a simple motel room set. The scene featuring Scully being beaten up by the bounty hunter was not acted by Anderson, but a stunt woman.12 The stiletto weapon, often referred to as the &quot;gimlet&quot;, used by the bounty hunter was constructed from aluminium and acrylic, and activated by a pneumatic hose hidden in actor Brian Thompson's sleeve.13 The grunt Scully utters when pushed to the ground was insisted on by Standards and Practices, giving the reasoning that the show needed to make it clear for the viewers that she was not dead. According to executive producer Frank Spotnitz it was an &quot;arcane, bizarre logic that you have to deal with when you're putting a show on network television.&quot;14 As director Rob Bowman got dissatisfied with the first take of Skinner pushing X against the elevator, Mitch Pileggi and Steven Williams decided to do the stunt for real, and Pileggi did it with so much strength that it broke the back of the elevator scenery.15 Williams' background in fight choreography, stemming from his role in Missing in Action 2: The Beginning, allowed him to help in choreographing the brawl.16
One hundred and forty tons of snow and ice were trucked into a soundstage in order to create the scene with the submarine towards the end of the episode,17 and said stage had to be refrigerated for five days. The control tower scenery was able to rise or lower only five feet, leading to restrictions such as filming on black backdrops.18 A decommissioned submarine, Her Majesty's Canadian Ship Mackenzie, was rented from the Royal Canadian Navy and used for the submarine interior. It was reused two episodes later for interior shots in &quot;D&lt;U+00F8&gt;d Kalm&quot;.1920
Reception
&quot;End Game&quot; premiered on the Fox network on , and was first broadcast in the United Kingdom on BBC Two on .21 The episode earned a Nielsen household rating of 11.2 with a 19 share, meaning that roughly  of all television-equipped households, and  of households watching television, were tuned in to the episode.22 A total of  households watched this episode during its original airing.23
The episode has been met with positive reviews from critics. In a retrospective of the second season in Entertainment Weekly, the episode was rated an A-, being called &quot;an exhausting, essential chapter, boasting the series' most visually stunning finale&quot;.24 Writing for The A.V. Club, Zack Handlen rated the episode an A, noting that it was &quot;X-Files in top form&quot;. He felt that the fight between Skinner and X was &quot;one of the season's great moments&quot;, although he derided the use of Scully in a &quot;heroine-as-victim&quot; role.25 Michelle Bush, in her book Myth-X, has noted that &quot;End Game&quot; is &quot;a good example of the basic premises that Mulder and Scully cannot succeed without the other&quot;, and serves to highlight &quot;the danger of making someone else's choice for them.&quot;26
Footnotes
References
External links
es:End Game (The X-Files) fr:Compressions it:Episodi di X-Files (prima stagione)#Omicidi del terzo tipo hu:Gumiember (X-akt&lt;U+00E1&gt;k)
Category:The X-Files (season 2) episodes Category:1995 television episodes
Lowry, pp.202&lt;U+2013&gt;204↩
Lovece, pp.154&lt;U+2013&gt;156↩
↩
Edwards, p.117&lt;U+2013&gt;118↩
↩
Lowry, p.77↩
Lowry, p.204↩
↩
Lovece, p.157↩
Edwards, p.116↩
↩
Lowry, p.249↩
 EW.com |publisher=Entertainment Weekly |date=November 29, 1996 |accessdate=January 4, 2012}}↩
 The X-Files/Millennium {{!}} TV Club |publisher=A.V. Club |date=June 13, 2010 |accessdate=January 3, 2012 |first=Zack |last=Handlen }}↩
Bush, p.62↩
