The Toyota War is the name commonly given to the last phase of the Chadian-Libyan conflict, which took place in 1987 in Northern Chad and on the Libyan-Chadian border. It takes its name from the Toyota trucks used to provide mobility for the Chadian troops as they fought against the Libyans.1 The 1987 war resulted in a heavy defeat for Libya, which, according to American sources, lost one tenth of its army, with 7,500 troops killed and 1.5 billion dollars worth of military equipment destroyed or captured.2
The war began with the Libyan occupation of northern Chad in 1983, when Libya's leader Gaddafi, refusing to recognize the legitimacy of the Chadian President Hiss&lt;U+00E8&gt;ne Habr&lt;U+00E9&gt;, militarily supported the attempt by the opposition Transitional Government of National Unity (GUNT) to overthrow Habr&lt;U+00E9&gt;. The plan was foiled by the intervention of France that, first with Op&lt;U+00E9&gt;ration Manta and later with Op&lt;U+00E9&gt;ration Epervier, limited Libyan expansion to north of the 16th parallel, in the most desertic and sparsely inhabited part of Chad.3
In 1986 the GUNT rebelled against Gaddafi, stripping Libya of its main cover of legitimacy for its military presence in Chad. Seeing an occasion to unify Chad behind him, Habr&lt;U+00E9&gt; ordered his forces to pass the 16th parallel so as to link with the GUNT rebels (who were fighting the Libyans in Tibesti) in December.4 A few week later a bigger force striked at Fada, destroying the local Libyan garrison. In three months, combining the methods of guerilla and conventional warfare in a common strategy5, Habr&lt;U+00E9&gt; was able to retake almost all Norhern Chad, and in the following months inflicted new heavy defeats too the Libyans, till a ceasefire putting end to the conflict was signed in September. The ceasefire left open the issue of the disputed Aouzou Strip, that was eventually assigned to Chad by the International Court of Justice in 1994.
Forces on the ground
  At the opening of 1987, the last year of the war, the Libyan expeditionary force was still impressive, comprising 8,000 troops, 300 tanks, many multiple rocket launchers (rocket artillery) and regular artillery pieces, Mi-24 helicopters and sixty combat aircraft. These forces did not have a unified command, but were divided into an Operational Group South, active in the Tibesti with 2,500 men, and an Operational Group East, centered in Faya-Largeau, under which fell the remaining Libyan regulars in Chad.6
Behind this appearance of strength, weaknesses were to manifest themselves. The Libyans were prepared for a war in which they would provide ground and air support to their Chadian allies, act as assault infantry, and provide reconnaissance. However, by 1987, Gaddafi had lost his allies, exposing Libya's inadequate knowledge of the area. Libyan garrisons came to resemble isolated and vulnerable islands in the Chadian Sahara. Also important was the low morale among the troops, who were fighting in a foreign country, and the structural disorganization of the Libyan army, which was in part induced by Gaddafi's fear of a military coup against him. This fear led him to avoid the professionalization of the armed forces.78
The Libyans had also to deal with the greatly strengthened Chadian National Armed Forces (FANT), which was comprised of 10,000 highly motivated troops, led by experienced and able commanders, such as Idriss D&lt;U+00E9&gt;by, Hassan Djamous and President Hiss&lt;U+00E8&gt;ne Habr&lt;U+00E9&gt; himself. And while FANT previously had no airpower, limited mobility and few antitank and antiaircraft weapons, by 1987 it could count on the French Air Force to ground the Libyan aircraft, and, more importantly, to provide 400 highly mobile Toyota pickups equipped with MILAN anti-tank guided missiles. It is these trucks that gave the name &quot;Toyota War&quot; to this last phase of the Chadian-Libyan conflict.910
Libyan expulsion
Habr&lt;U+00E9&gt; selected as the first target for his reconquest of northern Chad the well-fortified Libyan communications base of Fada, defended by 2,000 Libyans and the bulk of the Democratic Revolutionary Council (CDR) militia (Gaddafi's Chadian proxies), well-provided with armour and artillery. Against these Hassan Djamous, the thirty-year-old head of the FANT, commanded 4,000–5,000 troops. Taking advantage of his army's superior knowledge of the terrain, which apparently included unknown access points to the base, Djamous avoided a frontal assault and used his forces' high mobility, to surround the Libyan positions and then unleashed his troops, destroying the defending garrison. In the battle, 784 Libyans were killed and 100 tanks destroyed, while only 50 FANT soldiers died.1112
The unexpected defeat stunned Gaddafi; he reacted on January 4 by recalling to service all the army reservists and, in an act of defiance, bombing civilians in Arada, south of the 16th parallel, an action to which France answered with a second airstrike on Ouadi Doum after that in February 1986, destroying the radar system, which would have the effect of blinding the Libyan Air Force in Chad for the following months.13 Gaddafi attempted to contain the FANT threat by rushing several new battalions into Chad (especially to Faya-Largeau and Ouadi Doum), including units of the elite Jamahiriya Guard. This brought the amount of Libyan forces in the country to a total of 11,000 by March.14
In March 1987, the main Libyan air base of Ouadi Doum was captured by Chadian forces. Although strongly defended by mine fields, 5,000 troops, tanks, armored vehicles, and aircraft, the Libyans' Base was overcome by a smaller Chadian attacking force led by Djamous equipped with trucks mounted with machine guns and antitank weapons. Observers estimated that, in the Chadian victories in the first three months of 1987, more than 3,000 Libyan soldiers had been killed or captured or had deserted. Large numbers of tanks, armored personnel carriers, artillery, fixed-wing aircraft, and helicopters were captured or destroyed. In some cases, Libya sent its own aircraft to bomb abandoned Libyan equipment to deny its use to the Chadians. It was reported that in many cases Libyan soldiers had been killed while fleeing to avoid battle. At Ouadi Doum, panicked Libyans had suffered high casualties running through their own minefields.15
 The fall of Ouadi Doum was a severe setback for Libya. Deserted by most of their Chadian allies, Libyan forces found themselves isolated in alien territory, and the loss of the main Libyan air base in Chad prevented Libya from providing close air cover to its troops. In general, the offensive against FANT had exposed the vulnerability of Libya's heavy armor to a more mobile enemy. On Gaddafi's orders, a general withdrawal was undertaken from Borkou-Ennedi-Tibesti Prefecture, beginning with Faya-Largeau. The town had served as the main Libyan base during the preceding four years, but was in danger of being encircled. Its garrison of 3,000 troops, together with the survivors of Ouadi Doum, retired toward the Libyan base at Maatan-as-Sarra, north of the Chadian border.16 In an attempt to save his prestige, Gaddafi announced that Libya had won the confrontation, and was now leaving Chad so that the opposition could play its part in fighting Habr&lt;U+00E9&gt;.17
These military actions left Habr&lt;U+00E9&gt; in control of Chad and in a position to threaten the expulsion of Libya from the Aouzou Strip, affected the international perception of Libya as a significant regional military power, and cast renewed doubt on the competence and determination of Libyan soldiers, especially in engagements beyond the country's borders to which they evidently felt no personal commitment.18
The Toyota War attracted considerable interest in the United States, where the possibility of using Habr&lt;U+00E9&gt; to overthrow Gaddafi was given serious consideration. As part of the Reagan Administration's support for his government, Habr&lt;U+00E9&gt;, during a visit to Washington, received a pledge of 32 million United States dollars worth of aid, including Stinger anti-aircraft missilles.1920
Renewed Chadian offensive
 In August 1987, the encouraged Chadians carried their offensive into the disputed Aouzou Strip, occupying the town of Aouzou following another battle in which the Libyans suffered severe losses in troops and abandoned equipment. In retaliation Libya intensified its air bombardments against towns in the north, usually from altitudes beyond the range of FANT's shoulder-fired missiles. Appeals by Habr&lt;U+00E9&gt; for French air missions to defend the area against the bombing were rejected, as Aouzou had been retaken against the wishes of French President Fran&lt;U+00E7&gt;ois Mitterrand. Instead, Mitterrand called for international mediation to settle competing claims to the disputed territory.2122
After a succession of counterattacks, toward the end of August the Libyans finally drove the 400 Chadian troops out of the town of Aouzou. This victory - the first by Libyan ground forces since the start of the Toyota War - was apparently achieved through close-range air strikes, which were followed by ground troops advancing cross-country in jeeps, Toyota all-terrain trucks, and light armored vehicles. For the Libyans, who had previously relied on ponderous tracked armour, the assault represented a conversion to the desert warfare tactics developed by FANT.23 Anxious to highlight the victory, Gaddafi flew foreign journalists to the region, so they could report his success.24
Habr&lt;U+00E9&gt; quickly reacted to this setback and to the continued bombing of FANT concentrations in northern Chad. On September 5 1987 he mounted a surprise raid against the key Libyan air base at Maatan-as-Sarra. Reportedly, 1,000 Libyans were killed, 300 were captured, and hundreds of others were forced to flee into the surrounding desert. Chad claimed that its troops destroyed about 32 aircraft - including MiG-21 and MiG-23 fighters, Su-22 fighter-bombers, and Mi-24 helicopters - before the FANT column withdrew to Chadian soil.25
The attack had been opposed by France, who refused to provide FANT with intelligence and logistical support, causing FANT to suffer considerable losses. The French Defence Minister Andr&lt;U+00E9&gt; Giraud let it be known that &quot;France was not implicated in any way&quot; in the attack and &quot;had not been informed of it&quot;. The American reaction was markedly different, as it had previously supported the attempted reconquest of the Aouzou Strip; it now welcomed the Chadian raid.26 
Ceasefire
Because of domestic opposition, internal demoralization, and international hostility, Gaddafi assumed a more conciliatory attitude following his defeat. On the other side, Habr&lt;U+00E9&gt; also found himself vulnerable, as the French feared that the attack on Maatan as-Sarrah was only the first stage of a general offensive into Libya proper, a possibility that France was not disposed to tolerate. As a result, Mitterrand forced Habr&lt;U+00E9&gt; to accept the mediation efforts of the Organization of African Unity's Zambian Chairman, Kenneth Kaunda, which resulted in a ceasefire on September 11.272829
It was assumed that war would, sooner of later, resume. Instead, while there were minor violations of the ceasefire,30 Gaddafi announced in May 1988 that he would recognize Habr&lt;U+00E9&gt; as President of Chad &quot;as a gift to Africa,&quot; even as Libya refused to leave the disputed Aouzou Strip.31 On October 3 the two countries resumed diplomatic relations, and another important step was made when the two countries agreed in September 1990 to refer the dispute to the International Court of Justice.32 On February 3 1994 the court ruled in favour of Chad, thus definitively solving the Aouzou controversy by assigning the territory to the southern country.33
References
Notes
Category:History of Chad Category:History of Libya Category:Wars involving the states and peoples of Africa
A. Clayton, Frontiersmen, p. 161↩
G. Simons, Libya and the West, p. 58↩
K. Pollack, pp. 382–385↩
S. Nolutshungu, Limits of Anarchy, p. 212↩
M. Azevedo, p. 124↩
K. Pollack, p. 391↩
K. Pollack, p. 386, 398↩
S. Nolutshungu, pp. 218–219↩
M. Azevedo, pp. 149–150↩
K. Pollack, p. 391, 398↩
K. Pollack, pp. 391–392↩
S. Nolutshungu, p. 216↩
M. Brecher &amp; J. Wilkenfeld, A Study in Crisis, p. 94↩
K. Pollack, p. 392↩
H. Metz, p. 262↩
T. Collelo, Chad↩
M. Azevedo, p. 150↩
S. Nolutshungu, p. 221↩
S. Nolutshungu, p. 222↩
S. Nolutshungu, pp. 222–223↩
M. Brecher &amp; J. Wilkenfeld, p. 95↩
S. Nolutshungu, p. 223↩
G. Simons, p. 60↩
