Orlando Manuel Cepeda Pennes (born September 17, 1937) is a former Major League Baseball first baseman.
Cepeda was born to a poor family, his father, Pedro Cepeda, was a baseball player in Puerto Rico which influenced his interest in the sport from a young age. His first conatct with professional came about when he was a batboy for the Santurce Crabbers of Puerto Rico. Pedro Zorilla, the team's owner convinced his family to let him attend a New York Giants tryout. He would play in several Minor League Baseball teams before gathering interest from the Giants, who had just moved to San Francisco.
During a career that lasted sixteen years, he played with the San Francisco Giants (1958&lt;U+2013&gt;66), St. Louis Cardinals (1966&lt;U+2013&gt;68), Atlanta Braves (1969&lt;U+2013&gt;72), Oakland Athletics (1972), Boston Red Sox (1973) and Kansas City Royals (1974). Cepeda would be selected to play in seven Major League Baseball All-Star Games during his career, becoming the first player from Puerto Rico to start one. In 1978, Cepeda was sentenced to five years in prison on drug possession charges, of which he would serve ten months in prison and the rest on probation. In 1987, Cepeda would be contracted by the San Francisco Giants to work as a scout and &quot;goodwill ambassador&quot;. In 1999, Cepeda was inducted into the National Baseball Hall of Fame by the Veterans Committee.
Early life
Orlando Cepeda was born in Ponce, to Pedro Cepeda and Carmen Pennes. His father was a professional baseball player in Puerto Rico, where he was considered one of the best players of his generation.1 Cepeda saw his father play baseball for the first time in 1946, and was instantly interested in the game.2 Several players from the Negro leagues visited their house, which influenced his view of the sport. He would become a fan of Minnie Mi&lt;U+00F1&gt;oso, following his career in the Cuban League, Negro leagues, Major League Baseball and the Caribbean. The family was poor, being forced to live in wood houses, without telephone or refrigerator.3 When he was ten, Cepeda began to sell newspapers, to participate in a tournament organized for the paper boys.4 His first tryout came three years later, he practiced with the team for three months, but didn't made the roster. Cepeda then began playing basketball, but he tore a knee cartilage and underwent surgery. The injury kept him inactive for nearly a year, and the doctor recommended him to avoid practicing basketball.5 He began practicing again, noticing that his physical strength had significantly improved in two years. One day, an amateur baseball player saw him play and recruited him to play with his team. The organization won Puerto Rico's amateur championship and went on to play against an All-Star team from the Dominican Republic. Pedro Zorilla, then owner of the Santurce Crabbers attended this game while scouting another player, but his interest in Cepeda grew after seeing him play. In 1953, Zorilla brought him into the team, working as a batboy. After retiring, Pedro Cepeda worked for the government, checking the water of rivers in the municipality. He contracted Malaria, which eventually precipitated his death at age 49.6 This illness worsened the family's living conditions, moving from Guayama to Juncos, where the ecomic situation deteriorated. They moved again, this time to San Juan. Here, his mother performed several odd jobs to support the family.7 After her father's death, there wasn't sufficient income in the household to pay for college.8 Cepeda would form friendships with several criminals in their neighborhood, who used to steal as entertainment.
Baseball career
Minor League Baseball
Zorilla would convince Cepeda's family to cover an airplane ticket, to participate in a New York Giants tryout. After the tryout, he was assigned to Sandersville, a Class D team.9 Cepeda was subsequently transferred to a team in Salem, Virginia. He had trouble adapting here, due to not speaking English and encountering racial segregation being promoted by the Jim Crow laws.10 Shortly after moving, Zorilla called him and informed that his father was in critical condition. Pedro Cepeda died a few days after, Orlando payed the burial expenses and returned to Salem. Cepeda was depressed, which affected his performance.11 He wanted to quit and return to Puerto Rico, but Zorilla convinced him to play for Kokomo Giants, a team that participated in the Mississippi-Ohio Valley League. After arriving, Walt Dixon, the team's manager, assigned him to the third baseman position. Cepeda batted in the &quot;cleanup spot&quot;, finishing with a .393 average, hitting 21 home runs and 91 runs batted in.12 Jim Tobin, who owned his contract noticed his potetial and sold his player's rights back to the New York Giants. After a visit to Puerto Rico, Cepeda returned to New York, before being to play with St. Cloud in Class C. The team reassigned him to first baseman, he adapted to the change quickly. That year, Cepeda won the Northern League Triple Crown, finishing with an avera of .355 with 112 and 26 home runs.13 Jack Schwarz promoted him to Class B, a decision that he protested, noting that players with worst performance were being sent to Double A. Following a solid season in Class B, Cepeda played for the Crabbers in the Puerto Rican Professional Baseball League (LBPPR) during the winter, concluding with averages of .310, 11 home runs and 40 RBIs. He then signed a Class A contract with Springfield, only accepting it if he was allowed to play with the Minneapolis Millers in spring training. Cepeda had a slow start, but his averages improved as the games advanced and the team retained him in their roster. After conpleting the 1957 season with the Millers, he returned to Puerto Rico and played in the LBPPR. While playing with Santurce, Bill Rigney, Horace Stoneham and Tom Sheehan scouted him in behalf of the Giants, who had just moved from New York to San Francisco. He was invited to the team's spring training along other prospects, including Felipe Alou and Willie Kirkland.
San Francisco Giants (1958-1966)
He was called up by the San Francisco Giants in , on his first season, Cepeda batted .312 with 25 home runs and 96 RBI, led the National League in doubles (38), and was named Rookie of the Year. He signed his first major league contract ten minutes before debuting in the league, earning $7,000 in this season.14 In San Francisco, the team received significant media attention. Due to his performance, the team raised his salary to $9,500 in June.15 During this season, Cepeda lived with Rub&lt;U+00E9&gt;n G&lt;U+00F3&gt;mez, but stopped doing so after some tension developed between them. His average remained steady throughout the season, never falling below .305, which was his average in September.16 The Giants held the National League's lead for a month, but their record in August and September was below .500, and they lost the pennant race. Cepeda and Willie Mays were the only National League players to finish the season ranked among the leaders in hits, home runs, runs batted in, batting average, runs scored and stolen bases.17 He was unanimously selected the &quot;Rookie of the Year&quot;, becoming the second player after Frank Robinson to receive the award in such a fashion. He was also selected the &quot;Most Valuable Giant&quot; in a poll conducted by the San Francisco Examiner.18 On September 28, 1958, the publication presented him a plaque for this recognition. After the season concluded, Cepeda used his salary to buy a new house for his mother. This year he won the LBPPR batting title with an average of .362, while Santurce won the league's championship.19 The Giants offered him a $12,000 contract, which he refused asking for $20,000. After negotiations, both parts reached an agreement at $17,000.
In 1959, Cepeda reported to spring training with more confidence than the year before. He opened the season scoring hits in nine straight games, with 15 hits in his first 35 at-bats.20 After experiencing a brief slump during the latter half of May, Cepeda recovered, hitting 12 home runs by June 4, 1959. He was selected as a starter in both All-Star game during this season.21 Cepeda was briefly moved to third base to open a spot for Willie McCovey in the starting lineup, but was moved to the outfield after committing errors in the position.22 He hit six home runs between August and September. The Giants remained in the race for the National League's pennant during the latter part of the season, but were eliminated from competition after losing a series against the Dodgers, eventually finishing third. Once the season was over, Cepeda led the team in batting average (.317) and RBIs (105).23 Cepeda subsequently moved from Daly City to Sunset District, seeking a house within the city. In 1960, the Giants moved him back to first base after McCovey was sent to the minor leagues. Cepeda finished with an average of .297, with 24 home runs and 96 RBI.24 He moved twice this year, first to 19th and Pacheco and then to 48th and Pacheco, where he and McCovey bought a building next to the ocean. On December 3, 1960, Cepeda married Annie Pino in a ceremony that took place in a small church of San Juan.25 This was followed by a large reception at the San Juan Hilton hotel. After the ceremonies, the couple moved to the building at 48th and Pacheco.
In 1961, Cepeda had what he considers the best statistics of his career. He led the league in RBIs (142), home runs (46) and home run percentage (7.9).26 He was once again selected to play in the starting lineup of the All-Star Game. The Giants led National League in runs scored, while the pitching lineup had a collective earned run average of 3.77. The team finished in the third position of their division. Cepeda finished second in the Most Valuable Player voting, after Frank Robinson.27 After the season ended, Cepeda who at the moment was winning $30,000 asked for a $20,000 based on his performance. The team considered that he would be making too much money for a fourth-year player, the negotiations continued until a final quantity of 46,000 was determined.28 In 1962, the Giants had balance in the performance of the players, constantly rivaling the Dodgers for the division's lead. Several players from the team, including Cepeda, participated in the All-Star Games. Finishing tied with the Dodgers, the Giants played against them in a playoff series to determine the National League's champion, which they won 2-1.29 The team advanced to the World Series, facing the New York Yankees. New York won in a seven-game series. Cepeda had averages of .306, with 35 home runs and 114 RBIs.30 In 1961 and 1962, Cepeda had strong years; however, he had serious problems with the team's manager Alvin Dark, to the point of almost unattending some games.31 Among the things that Dark did after being named manager was telling the Latin American players that they should stop speaking Spanish in the clubhouse. Cepeda immediately confronted him, after this Dark would avoid summoning the Hispanic players to any team meeting.32
During the winter, Cepeda returned to the LBPPR, where he suffered a knee injury while training. In 1963, he played the entire MLB season with the injury, not informing it to the Giants out of concern for his spot in the roster.33 He was in constant pain, but was in the race for a batting title along Roberto Clemente, Dick Groat and Tommy Davis, eventually finishing fifth. His batting average was .316, with 34 home runs and 97 RBIs.34 In 1964, San Francisco remained in the pennant race until the last week, when the St Louis Cardinals defeated the New York Mets to secure it. Cepeda led the team in batting average with .304 and an slugging percentage of .539.35 Cepeda attended the 1965 spring training, having limited participation. One of his friends, who was from Mexico brought in a jar with alcohol and cannabis to reduce the pain, noting that it was an &quot;old Mexican remedy&quot;.36 Noticing this a club house employee offered to bring him a cannabis &quot;joint&quot;, which he accepted. After this event, he consumed the drug regularly in order to &quot;relax&quot;.37 After experiencing swelling in the knee during the first games of the season, a group of doctors at recommended him to stop playing.38 However, Cepeda refused to do so since baseball was his main source of income. He received treatment from Gene Sollovief, a Russian doctor, who implemented a weight and exercise regime.39 He returned to action, but only had 34 at bats with an average of .176 and only three home runs. He returned to Puerto Rico, undergoing further physical therapy. In the off-season, Cepeda also brought a house in Diamond Heights, while his wife was pregnant with his first son, Orlando junior. He attended the 1966 spring training, recovered from the injury. However, he wasn't placed in the team's starting lineup. In the middle of a series, Cepeda was informed that he had been traded to the St. Louis Cardinals for pitcher Ray Sadecki.
St Louis Cardinals (1966-1968)
The Giants were playing a series against the Cardinals in St. Louis, so Cepeda joined the team in the city. Bob Howsam, the team's general manager, was interested in him because the team had offensive problems.40 After the trade, the team granted him a new contract for $53,000.41 With the help of Harry Caray, the Cardinals' announcer, Cepeda moved to a house in Olivette, Missouri. The team finished in the sixth place of the division, with a record of 83-79.42 He finished his first season with the Cardinals playing 123 games, with an average of .303 and was named the National League Comeback Player of the Year.43
In , the Cardinals entered the season with analysts giving them odds of 12-1 of winning the pennant. Cepeda began the season with strong offensive, at one point driving in seven runs in a single game.44 The team promoted offensive performance by finish a dollar to any player that left teammates on base, the money was used to pay the postseason.45 The Cardinals contended the early league standings with the Chicago Cubs, but the team took control of the National League pennant race as the season progressed. Cepeda's offense remained stable, finishing June as the league's leader in doubles.46 He played in his seventh All-Star Game, which the National League won 2-1. The Cardinals won the pennant and defeated the Boston Red Sox to win the World Series. He concluded the season hitting .325, 21 game winning hits and with a league-leading 111 RBIs. Cepeda he was named the National League Most Valuable Player. He was the second National League player, after Carl Hubbell to win the award unanimously. Also, he is the only player in baseball history to win Rookie of the Year and Most Valuable Player awards unanimously. He was the first Latin player to win the home run and RBI titles.
In 1968, the Cardinals were considered the strongest team in the Majors.47 The Cardinals won the pennant for a second straigh year, this time with a nine-game lead. The Detroit Tigers won the American League pennant by twelve games. Cepeda, who had a low offensive average in the 1967 World Series, hit a home run that gave the Cardinals a two to one lead. The Tigers, however, won three of the next four games, to win their first World Series since 1945. This season was called the &quot;Year of the Pitcher&quot;, because of the overwhelming dominance pitching had over offense in 1968. Cepeda had his the worst statistical year of his career as a regular player, finishing with an average of .248 with 16 home runs and 73 RBIs.48 Scoring career-lows in all three fields.49 In March 1969, the Cardinals traded him to the Atlanta Braves in exchange for Joe Torre.
Late career
The trade took Cepeda by surprise, after learning that his new team was the Braves he considered retirement, but decided against after discussing it with his wife.50 He moved to the city with uncertainty, wondering if the effect of the Jim Crow laws was still present, but his concerns disppeared once they settled.51 Cepeda attended the 1969 spring training on West Palm Beach, being welcomed to the team by Hank Aaron.52 This marked the first time that the league's postseason would have five-game playoffs. The Braves won the National League West with a record of 93-69, before losing to the New York Mets in the following round. On this season, Cepeda had an average of .257 with 22 home runs and 88 RBIs.
In 1970, the Braves's offensive had Rico Carty leading the league in average, while Cepeda and Aaron drove more than a hundred runs in.53 However, the team's pitching was ineffective and the team finished in the fourth place of the division.54 Cepeda concluded with an average of .305, 34 home runs and 111 RBIs. In 1971, Cepeda began the season with a solid offensive, hitting 10 home runs before May was over. However, he re-injured one of his knees in his house. The Braves's physician administered a shot, but that resulted ineffective. Cepeda would be attended by Dr.Funk, the Atlanta Falcons's orthopedicist, after running tests and examining X-rays, he determined that the injury was serious. Due to this, Cepeda began playing part time, only hitting five more home runs while his average fell.55 In September he traveled to New York where he underwent surgery, returning to Puerto Rico to recover during the winter. In 1972, Cepeda began playing while still felling pain. On May 16, 1972, he hit two home runs against Houston.56 During this time Paul Richards had been replaced by Eddie Robinson as the team general manager. Robinson didn't assign threatment for Cepeda's leg, eventually deciding to trade him.57
In July, Cepeda was traded to the Oakland Athletics for Denny McLain. After playing for a week, he was hospitalized and underwent a second surgery on his injured knee.58 Cepeda remained in Oakland three months before returning to Puerto Rico. Upon arriving he received a telegram from Charlie Finley, the Athletics' owner, telling him that if he didn't respond within three days his contract would be released. Cepeda decided not to call, intending to retire from baseball.59 In 1973, the American League established the designated hitter role, intending to improve attendance. The Boston Red Sox contacted him, telling him that his role with the team would only require batting. Cepeda would become the first player to sign a contract to exclusively play as a designated hitter.60 Cepeda had an average of .289 with 20 home runs and 86 RBIs in 550 at bats. He was also named Designated Hitter of the Year. Cepeda's twentieth home run established a league record, becoming the first player to hit twenty or more home runs with four different teams.61 He went to Puerto Rico and prepared to play in the 1974 season, but the team decided to release him and Luis Aparicio during spring training. After briefly playing in Mexico, the Kansas City Royals offered him a contract. In his last season, Cepeda had 107 at bats, with an average of .215 and one home run.
Cepeda was the first player from Puerto Rico to win a triple crown in Minor League Baseball, doing so in 1956, with a batting average of .355, 26 home runs, and 112 RBIs. He was selected to seven All-Star Games (1959&lt;U+2013&gt;64, 1967). He was the first Puerto Rican to start in an All Star Game and to be selected in two positions, serving as a first basemen and left fielder. His lifetime numbers in the Puerto Rican Professional Baseball League are .325 batting average (fifth place), 89 home runs, 340 runs batted in and .544 slugging (second place and only Puerto Rican with .500+). He batted .300+ eleven times, the most in league history.
Retirement
Divorce, second marriage and conviction
Cepeda tried a comeback in the LBPPR, but noticed that his body couldn't perform well, opting to retire instead. After retiring, he began experiencing several personal problems. He and Pino divorced in 1973, Cepeda had other relationships outside of wedlock, from which one son, Carl Cepeda, was born.62 After the couple separated, he met Nydia Fernandez, who was from Carolina, Puerto Rico. The couple married in 1975, fathering two children, Malcom and Ali.63
Later that year, Cepeda traveled to Colombia to direct a baseball clinic, and once there, he met a group of drug dealers who convinced him to put bags containing five pounds of cannabis in two boxes containing hand-made clothing. Cepeda had continued to use cannabis since 1965.64 He returned to Puerto Rico, waiting ten days before contacting the airport to see if the boxes had arrived. When Cepeda arrived to collect his cargo, he was told that they could not be released, since the shipping cost had not been covered. At that point, two police officers (who were aware of the packages' contents) instructed one of the air freight employees to give Cepeda the boxes with or without payment.65 An airport employee delivered the boxes to Cepeda's car, and once Cepeda returned to his vehicle, he was arrested and charged with drug possession.66
While on trial for that charge, Cepeda was arrested a second time, after a man alleged that Cepeda had pointed a gun at him. A third case was brought by Pino, seeking an increase in alimony and child support payments.67 In 1978, after three days at trial, Cepeda was declared guilty of the drug possession charges and sentenced to five years of imprisonment. Cepeda served ten months in jail time and the balance of his sentence on probation. Following his release, a district attorney in Puerto Rico told the prison's warden that if Cepeda returned the mafia would kill him.68 leading to Cepeda's assignment to a &quot;halfway house&quot; in Philadelphia.
After completing that program, Cepeda coached a LBPPR team in Bayam&lt;U+00F3&gt;n, Puerto Rico and was later hired as a scout by the Chicago White Sox. In 1981, the team assigned to work as a roving instructor with one of their Minor League Baseball club in Lynn, Massachusetts. Roland Hemond released him later that year, and he briefly worked as the Crabbers' coach.69
Cepeda converted to Buddism, receiving his Gohozon on April 17, 1983.70 One year later, he moved to Los Angeles, renting an apartment in Burbank. During this timeframe, his relationship with Fernandez deteriorated. She eventually left the house and returned to Puerto Rico, with Malcom and Ali and filed a divorce suit.71 A friend introduced Cepeda to Mirian Ortiz, whom he eventually married.
Return to the Giants and community work
In 1987, Max Shapiro asked him to substitute for McCovey in a &quot;fantasy baseball camp&quot; in San Francisco, and although reluctuant at first, he accepted.72 Here he met and befriended publisher Laurence Hyman, who introduced Cepeda to San Francisco Giants' staff members and encouraged him to write to Al Rosen.73 After initially receiving no response, eventually Patrick J. Gallagher called to tell Cepeda that Rosen wanted to hire him as a scout. Cepeda worked in the Dominican Republic, Mexico and other Latin American countries during his first year, after which the Giants placed him on full time payroll.74 Cepeda later worked as a &quot;goodwill ambassador&quot; for the Giants, attending activities in schools, hospitals and community centers.75 and he represented the Giants in programs aimed at Latin American communities. He also joined S&lt;U+014D&gt;ka Gakkai International and participated in activities for the Puerto Rican communities in New York.76
Cepeda's son Carl, who had been adopted by a foster family and never met his parents, eventually found and met his father in 1995, following a two-year search.77 Cepeda threw the honorary first pitch for the third game of the 1989 National League Championship Series, and also for a regular season game between the Giants and Dodgers on September 17, 1997, his 60th birthday.78 In 2006, the Society for American Baseball Research (SABR) approved a chapter for Puerto Rico, the first in Latin America, and named the chapter in honor of Cepeda.
Induction to Hall of Fame
This drug-related episode and conviction caused Cepeda to have difficulty getting voted into the Baseball Hall of Fame. By the early 1990s, when his time of eligibility was beginning to run out, many Puerto Ricans, celebrities and ordinary citizens alike, began to campaign for his induction. Many of his backers alleged that other members of the Hall of Fame had committed crimes equal to or worse than attempted drug smuggling and were still inducted. Some international celebrities and former teammates also joined in the campaign. In 1994, his last year of eligibility by voting, he came within seven votes of being elected. In , he was elected by the Hall's Veterans Committee, joining Roberto Clemente as the only other Puerto Rican in Cooperstown.
Cepeda belongs to twelve halls of fame, most by any Puerto Rican athlete: Bay Area Sports Hall of Fame (1990);79 Puerto Rico Baseball Hall of Fame (1991); Laredo Latin American International Sports Hall of Fame (1995); Santurce Hall of Fame (1997); Puerto Rico Sports Hall of Fame (1993);80 Baseball Hall of Fame, Cooperstown (1999); Missouri Hall of Fame (2000);81 Guayama Hall of Fame (2000); Ponce Hall of Fame (2001); Cata&lt;U+00F1&gt;o Hall of Fame (2002); Hispanic Heritage Baseball Museum (2002) and African American Ethnic Sports Hall of Fame (2007).8283
Second arrest
On May 1, 2007 California Highway Patrol officers arrested Cepeda after stopping a speeding car on westbound Interstate 80, about 40 miles northeast of San Francisco. An officer found marijuana, cocaine and hypodermic syringes in the car.
In court, in May 2008, Deputy District Attorney Joe Camarata agreed to a plea deal allowing Cepeda to plead no contest to a charge of being in possession of less than 1 ounce of marijuana. The cocaine and a hypodermic syringe possession charges were dismissed.
Humanitarian and additional sports recognitions
Cepeda has been recognized nationally for his humanitarian efforts as an ambassador for baseball. He served as an honorary spokesman for the Crohn's and Colitis Foundation of America.
In 2001, he won the Ernie Banks Positive Image Lifetime Achievement Award. The citation for the award reads, in part, &quot;The legacy he is leaving is an impressive one indeed. His commitment to community service includes credentials for a Humanitarian Hall of Fame. He is now recognized nationally for his humanitarian efforts as an ambassador for baseball and the San Francisco Giants.&quot; It goes on to list many of his national and community contributions, including his regular visits to inner-city schools throughout the country in conjunction with HOPE: Helping Other People Excel. &quot;Each December, Orlando tours as part of the Giants Christmas Caravan visiting hospitals, schools and youth groups including the UC San Francisco Medical Center pediatric cancer ward. He is a participant in Athletes Against AIDS. He is also a public speaker for the Omega Boys and Girls Club, counseling at-risk children in the community.&quot;84
The Giants retired Orlando Cepeda's number 30. It hangs on the facing of the upper deck in the left field corner of AT&amp;T Park. On September 6, 2008, the Giants unveiled a statue of Cepeda next to the instalation.85 He is the fourth Giant to be honored a statue, the other players are Willie Mays, Willie McCovey, and Juan Marichal.86
In an article in 1976 in Esquire magazine, sportswriter Harry Stein published an &quot;All Time All-Star Argument Starter,&quot; consisting of five ethnic baseball teams. Cepeda, a Puerto Rican, was the first baseman on Stein's Latin team.
Cepeda is a Buddhist and S&lt;U+014D&gt;ka Gakkai International (SGI-USA) member. Cepeda shared his experience at an SGI-USA meeting: &quot;I had to fight every day,&quot; said Cepeda, explaining how he endured growing up in his native Puerto Rico. &quot;But when I joined the SGI-USA, I learned that peace comes from inside. From my Buddhist practice, I have learned how to be a person who cares about others.&quot;
Books by and about Orlando Cepeda
My Ups and Downs in Baseball by Orlando Cepeda with Charles Einstein. Putnam (1968; 2000).
High and Inside: Orlando Cepeda's Story by Orlando Cepeda with Mary Kelly. Hardwood Press (1984).
Baby Bull: From Hardball to Hard Time and Back by Orlando Cepeda with Herb Fagen. Taylor Trade Publishing (1998).
The Orlando Cepeda Story by Bruce Markusen. Pinata Books (2001).
See also
Players from Puerto Rico in MLB
List of famous Puerto Ricans
Bay Area Sports Hall of Fame
Top 500 home run hitters of all time
List of major league players with 2,000 hits
List of Major League Baseball players with 400 doubles
List of Major League Baseball players with 1000 runs
List of Major League Baseball players with 1000 RBI
List of Major League Baseball RBI champions
List of Major League Baseball home run champions
List of Major League Baseball doubles champions
Major League Baseball hitters with three home runs in one game
References
External links
Citation for 2001 Ernie Banks Positive Image Lifetime Achievement Award
Latin Sports Legends biography and photos
An Account of Cepeda's 1999 Hall of Fame induction ceremony
jrank Free Encyclopedia brief biography
Accomplishments
de:Orlando Cepeda fr:Orlando Cepeda ja:&lt;U+30AA&gt;&lt;U+30FC&gt;&lt;U+30E9&gt;&lt;U+30F3&gt;&lt;U+30C9&gt;&lt;U+30FB&gt;&lt;U+30BB&gt;&lt;U+30DA&gt;&lt;U+30C0&gt; fi:Orlando Cepeda
Category:Major League Baseball Rookie of the Year Award winners Category:National League All-Stars Category:National League home run champions Category:National League RBI champions Category:Atlanta Braves players Category:National Baseball Hall of Fame inductees Category:Boston Red Sox players Category:Kansas City Royals players Category:Major League Baseball designated hitters Category:Major League Baseball first basemen Category:Oakland Athletics players Category:Puerto Ricans of African descent Category:Puerto Rican baseball players Category:Puerto Rican sportspeople Category:San Francisco Giants players Category:St. Louis Cardinals players Category:People from Ponce, Puerto Rico Category:Major League Baseball players with retired numbers
Fagen et al., p. 3↩
Fagen et al., p. 10↩
Fagen et al., p. 5↩
Fagen et al., p. 14↩
Fagen et al., p. 15↩
Fagen et al., p. 6↩
Fagen et al., p. 7-8↩
Fagen et al., p. 23↩
Fagen et al., p. 25↩
Fagen et al., p. 27↩
Fagen et al., p. 28-29↩
Fagen et al., p. 43↩
Fagen et al., p. 50↩
Fagen et al., p. 53↩
Fagen et al., p. 57↩
Fagen et al., p. 61↩
Fagen et al., p. 66↩
Fagen et al., p. 69↩
Fagen et al., p. 67↩
Fagen et al., p. 71↩
Fagen et al., p. 87↩
Fagen et al., p. 78↩
Fagen et al., p. 81-82↩
Fagen et al., p. 81-82↩
Fagen et al., p. 74↩
Fagen et al., p. 75↩
Fagen et al., p. 89↩
Fagen et al., p. 94↩
Fagen et al., p. 95↩
Fagen et al., p. 81-82↩
Fagen et al., p.106↩
Fagen et al., p.102↩
Fagen et al., p.110↩
Fagen et al., p.109↩
Fagen et al., p.130↩
Fagen et al., p.132↩
Fagen et al., p.144↩
Fagen et al., p.152↩
Fagen et al., p.156↩
Fagen et al., p.160↩
Fagen et al., p.157↩
Fagen et al., p.161↩
Fagen et al., p.162↩
Fagen et al., p.163↩
Fagen et al., p.164↩
Fagen et al., p.168↩
Fagen et al., p.169↩
Fagen et al., p.170↩
Fagen et al., p.171↩
Fagen et al., p.173↩
Fagen et al., p.182↩
Fagen et al., p.184↩
Fagen et al., p.190↩
Fagen et al., p.186↩
Fagen et al., p.197↩
Fagen et al., p.198↩
Fagen et al., p.199↩
Fagen et al., p.200↩
Fagen et al., p.216↩
Fagen et al., p.202↩
Fagen et al., p.222↩
↩
Fagen et al., p.209↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
