Dame Ellen Terry, GBE (February 27 1848 – July 21 1928) was an English stage actress. Terry became the leading Shakespearean actress in Britain.
Life and career
 Alice Ellen Terry &lt;U+2013&gt; she reversed her names by the time of her first marriage &lt;U+2013&gt; was born in Coventry, England in into a theatrical family. Her parents, Benjamin and Sarah (n&lt;U+00E9&gt;e Ballard), were actors1 and had eleven children, five of whom (including Ellen), became actors: Florence], Fred, Kate and Marion. Two other children, George and Charles, were connected with theatre management. Charles was the father of two daughters who would also appear on the stage, Minnie and Beatrice.2
Early career
Terry's first appearance on stage came at the age of eight, when she appeared opposite Charles Kean as Mamilius in Shakespeare's The Winter's Tale at London's Princess' Theatre. Her older sister Kate, who had begun acting in London in 1852, also played at the Princess. She continued acting at the Princess Theatre until the Keans' retirement in 1859.3 In her autobiography she described herself during those years as &quot;a very strong, happy and healthy child.&quot;4 For the next two years, Terry and Kate toured in sketches and plays, accompanied by their parents and a musician.5 The family returned to London in 1861.
Between 1861 and 1862, Terry was engaged by the Royalty Theatre, managed by Madame Albina de Rhona, where she acted with [[Marge Kendal|the Kendals], among other famous actors. In 1862, she joined her sister Kate in Bristol and began working with J. H. Chute's stock company, where she played a wide variety of parts, including burlesque roles requiring singing and dancing. In 1863, Chute opened the Theatre Royal in Bath, where Terry, now aged 15, appeared at the opening as Titania in A Midsummer Night's Dream and then returned to London to join the company at the Haymarket Theatre in Shakespearean roles.6
Marriages, relationships and peak years
 Terry married three times and was involved in numerous relationships during her lifetime. In London, during an engagement at the Haymarket Theatre, Terry and her sister Kate had their portrait painted by the eminent artist George Frederick Watts, and he soon proposed marriage. Terry was impressed with the art and elegance of his lifestyle and wished to please her parents by making an advantageous marriage. They married on 20 February 1864, shortly before her 17th birthday, when Watts was 46. During her marriage to Watts, she was uncomfortable in the role of child bride. Terry and Watts were separated after only ten months of marriage, during which she took a break from the stage, returning by 1866.
In 1867, Terry, as Katherine, first played opposite Henry Irving (Petruchio) at the Garrick Theatre in The Taming of the Shrew. About 1868, Terry began a relationship with the progressive architect-designer Edward William Godwin, whom she had met some years before, and with whom she retreated to Hertfordshire, retiring from acting for six years. They did not marry, as Terry was still married to Watts and did not finalize a divorce until 1877, which was then a scandalous situation. With Godwin, she had a daughter, Edith Craig in 1869 and a son, Edward Gordon Craig, in 1872. The last name Craig was chosen to avoid the stigma of bastardy. The relationship with Godwin cooled in 1874 amidst financial difficulties, and Terry returned to her acting career. In 1874, Terry returned to the London stage. In 1875, she gave an acclaimed performance as Portia in The Merchant of Venice at the Prince of Wales's Theatre, and in 1876, she appeared as Lady Teazle in The School for Scandal and in a play called Olivia by W. G. Wills at John Hare's Court Theatre, among other performances. Terry married again on 21 December 1877 to Charles Clavering Wardell Kelly, an actor/journalist.
In 1878, Terry joined Henry Irving's company at the Lyceum Theatre as Ophelia opposite Irving's Hamlet. Soon, Terry was regarded as the leading Shakespearean actress in London, and in partnership with Henry Irving became successful in Britain (especially at Irving's Lyceum Theatre) and the U.S.7 Their 1879 production of The Merchant of Venice ran for an unusual 250 nights, and success fullowed success in the Shakespeare canon as well as in other major plays. Among her most celebrated roles with Irving were her Portia (Oscar Wilde wrote a sonnet to her upon seeing her in this role8), as well as Beatrice in Much Ado About Nothing (1880), Guinevere in King Arthur (1895) and Imogen in Cymbeline (1896).
Later years
In 1903, she formed a new venture, taking over management of the Imperial Theatre with her son, after her business partner, Irving, ended his tenure at the Lyceum in 1902. Irving died two years later. Terry divorced Wardell and struck up a friendship and a famous correspondence with George Bernard Shaw (who wrote the play Captain Brassbound's Conversion for her) during this time. Her new venture focused on the plays of Shaw and Henrik Ibsen. After Irving died, however, Terry again retired from the stage.
She returned to the theatre again in April 1906, playing Lady Cecily Wayneflete in Shaw's Captain Brassbound's Conversion at the Court Theatre. On June 12 1906, after 50 years on the stage, a star-studded gala performance was held at the Theatre Royal, Drury Lane, for Terry's benefit and to celebrate her jubilee, at which Enrico Caruso sang and W. S. Gilbert directed a performance of Trial by Jury, among other performances.9 She next appeared as Hermione in Herbert Beerbohm Tree's production of [[A Winter's Tale]. In 1907, she toured America under the direction of Charles Frohman. During that tour, On 22 March 1907, she married American actor James Carew, who had appeared with her at the Court Theatre. She was thirty years older than Carew.
Terry's acting career continued strongly, but her marriage broke up after only two years. In 1910 she toured the U.S. again with much success, acting and lecturing on the Shakespeare heroines. In 1914, she did the same in Australia and again in the U.S. While in the U.S. she underwent an operation for the removal of cataracts from both eyes, but the operation was only partly successful. In 1916, she appeared in her first film as Julia Lovelace in Her Greatest Performance and continued to act in London and on tour, also making a few more films through 1922. Her last fully staged role was as the Nurse in in Romeo and Juliet at the Lyric Theatre in 1919. In 1920 (except for two more films), she finally retired.
In 1925 she was made a Dame Grand Cross of the Order of the British Empire. In her last years, she gradually lost her eyesight and suffered from senility. She died in London at age 80, and her ashes rest at St Paul's, Covent Garden, London.
Legacy
After her death, the Ellen Terry Memorial Museum was founded in her memory at Smallhythe Place near Tenterden in Kent. The museum was taken over by the National Trust in 1939.
Terry's daughter Edith Craig became a theatre director, producer, costume designer and early pioneer of the women's suffrage movement in England; her son, Edward Gordon Craig, became an actor, scenery and effects designer, illustrator and director and founded the Gordon Craig School for the Art of the Theatre in Florence, Italy, in 1913; and her grandnephew, Sir John Gielgud became an actor. The singer Helen Terry and illustrator Helen Craig are also descendants of hers.
Bibliography
Auerbach, Nina. Ellen Terry: Player in Her Time (1997) University of Pennsylvania Press ISBN 978-0-8122-1613-4
Manvell, Roger. Ellen Terry. New York: G. P. Putnam's Sons, 1968.
Scott, Clement. Ellen Terry. New York: Frederick A. Stokes Company, 1900.
&quot;Drama: This Week.&quot; The Athen&lt;U+00E6&gt;um. 19 January 1895, p. 93.
Goodman, Jennifer R. &quot;The Last of Avalon: Henry Irving's King Arthur of 1895.&quot; Harvard Library Bulletin, 32.3 (Summer 1984) pp. 239-55.
Autobiography: Terry, Ellen. The Story of My Life. London: Hutchinson &amp; Co., 1908.
References
External links
Ellen Terry at the Family Records Centre
Find-A-Grave biography
Terry bibliography
Photos of Terry
Paintings and other images of Terry
Drawing of Terry as Portia in The Merchant of Venice
Drawing of Terry and Irving as Ophelia and Hamlet and information from the People Play website
de:Ellen Terry fr:Ellen Terry it:Ellen Terry ja:&lt;U+30A8&gt;&lt;U+30EC&gt;&lt;U+30F3&gt;&lt;U+30FB&gt;&lt;U+30C6&gt;&lt;U+30EA&gt;&lt;U+30FC&gt; pl:Ellen Terry sv:Ellen Terry
Category:English stage actors Category:Women of the Victorian era Category:People from Coventry Category:Dames Grand Cross of the Order of the British Empire Category:Shakespearean actors Category:1848 births Category:1928 deaths
Biography of Terry at the Stage Beauty website↩
Hartnoll, p. 815-17.↩
Hartnoll, p. 816.↩
Citation needed.↩
Biography and reviews of Terry↩
Profile of Terry by Amanda Hodges↩
