Leon Lastarza Hall (born December 9, 1984 in Vista, California), is an American football player, a defensive back who plays for the Cincinnati Bengals. He formerly played at the University of Michigan. Hall was drafted by the Bengals with the 18th pick in the 2007 NFL Draft.
Hall attended Vista High School where he played wide receiver and defensive back.
College career
As a freshman in 2003, Leon Hall played all 13 games with 3 starts. Hall finished the year with 26 tackles and three interceptions. Hall was a first-team All-American freshman.
In his sophomore season, Hall once again played all the Wolverines games, but this time making nine starts. Hall totaled 48 tackles, two interceptions, and recovered two fumbles for the Wolverines.
As a junior in 2005, Leon Hall finally started all 12 games. He registered 61 tackles, two sacks, four interceptions, and forced and recovered a fumble. Over the past three seasons, Hall returned punts for 163 yards and a score. Hall was a second-team All-Big Ten.
Leon Hall started all games in his final season as a Wolverine and tied his season best with three interceptions, including one against the Notre Dame and another against the cross-state rival Michigan State. Hall also led the Big Ten in pass breakups with 18 and recorded 35 tackles. Hall was also in contention for various awards. He was a finalist for the Bronko Nagurski Trophy, a semifinalist for the Jim Thorpe Award, and a quarterfinalist for the Lott Trophy. Hall also was first team AFCA All-American.
Leon Hall is Michigan's career pass breakup leader with 48 broken passes, tied for fourth on Michigan's career interception list with 12, and set a school record with an 83-yard fumble return against Northwestern University in 2005.
National awards
2004 Freshman All-American first team
2006 Bronko Nagurski Trophy finalist
2006 Jim Thorpe Award finalist
2006 Lott Trophy quarterfinalist
Conference honors
2004 All-Big Ten Conference Honorable Mention (coaches and media)
2005 All-Big Ten Conference Second Team (coaches and media)
2006 All-Big Ten Conference First Team (coaches and media, both unanimous)
Pro career
After providing an impressive 40 time at the NFL Combine, Hall was drafted 18th overall by the Cincinnati Bengals. Hall is expected to start alongside Johnathan Joseph, who was drafted by Cincinnati a year before, and veteran corner Deltha O'Neal.
External links
Official Michigan football profile
Category:1984 births Category:American football cornerbacks Category:Cincinnati Bengals players Category:Living people Category:Michigan Wolverines football players Category:People from San Diego
