Tony Mundine (born Anthony William Mundine, June 10, 1951, Baryulgil, New South Wales) is one of Australia's boxing legends and one the greatest Indigenous fighters. He held the Australian middleweight, light heavyweight, cruiserweight and heavyweight titles and Commonwealth middleweight and Light heavyweight titles and is the only Australian boxer to compete in four weight divisions. He fought Carlos Monzon on 5th October, 1974 for the World middleweight title but lost by a Knockout in the 7th round. No Australian boxer ever beat him in his 16 year career.
He played centre three-quarter for a Grafton Rugby League team, and showed promise and offered a place with the Redfern 'All Blacks' in the South Sydney Jurnior Rugby League in 1968 when he was 17. With the desire to keep fit he began visiting Ern McQuillan's gym in Newtown where his natural ability and speed showed on the punching bag. McQuillan seen within him a promise of something better to come with expert tuition and so a fighter-trainer contract began with Ern.
He currently lives in Redfern where he manages a training gym adjacent to The Block and is the father and boxing trainer/promoter of Anthony Mundine, guiding him to the world title bouts he himself had aspired to.
He was the winner of The Ella Award for Lifetime Achievement in Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Sport at The Deadlys in 2004.
Career
First bout March 5, 1969 against Frank Graham and retired after his last bout against Alex Sua March 19, 1984.
Won Australian Middleweight title April 23rd 1970 against Billy Choules
Won Australian Heavyweight title Feb 25th 1972 against Foster Bibron
Won Commonwealth Middleweight title April 14th, 1972 against Bunny Sterling
World Middleweight title lost KO by 7 Carlos Monzon Oct 5th 1974
Won Australian and Commonwealth Light Heavyweight titles Oct 30th, 1975 against Steve Aczel
Won Australian Cruiserweight title July 24th, 1981 against Steve Aczel.
1 2
External link
Tony Mundine's career boxing records
Boxing Record (text)
Vibe Australia
References
Category:1951 births Category:Australian boxers Category:Indigenous Australian sportspeople Category:People from New South Wales Category:Living people
http://turningsixty.com.au/memorylane/memorylane.html Turning Sixty↩
http://www.brookvaleps.nsw.edu.au/PROJECTS/Sports_Stars/Tony_Mundine.html Brookvale school↩
