Ian Brown (born 1954 in Lachine, Quebec) is a Canadian journalist and author, winner of several national magazine and newspaper awards.
He is currently the host of Human Edge and The View from Here on TVOntario, and has hosted programming for CBC Radio One, including Later the Same Day, Talking Books, and Sunday Morning. He has also worked as a business writer at Maclean's and the Financial Post, a feature reporter for The Globe and Mail, and a freelance journalist for other magazines including Saturday Night.
Brown is also the editor of What I Meant to Say: The Private Lives of Men, a controversial1 2006 collection of twenty-nine essays by prominent Canadian writers, including Greg Hollingshead, David MacFarlane, Don Gillmor, Bert Archer, and Brown himself, who asked his contributors to write on subjects that they'd like to discuss with women but had never been able to.23
Brown has also published three books, Freewheeling (1989) about the Billes family, owners of Canadian Tire, and Man Overboard. He is an occasional contributor to the American public radio program This American Life. The Boy in the Moon, a book-length version of Brown's series of Globe and Mail features dealing with his son Walker's rare genetic disorder, Cardiofaciocutaneous Syndrome (CFC), was published in the fall of 2009.
In January 2010, Ian Brown won British Columbia's National Award for Canadian Non-Fiction for his book The Boy in the Moon: A Father's Search for His Disabled Son. The award is Canada's richest non-fiction prize and offers the winner a $40,000 prize. In February, 2010, the book won the Charles Taylor Prize, a $25,000 prize which recognizes excellence in literary non-fiction.
Brown is married to Globe and Mail film critic Johanna Schneller.
Bibliography
Non-fiction
Freewheeling: The Feuds, Broods, and Outrageous Fortunes of the Billes Family and Canada's Favorite Company (1989)
''Man Overboard: True adventures with North American Men '' (1993)
What I Meant to Say: The Private Lives of Men (editor) (2006)
The Boy in the Moon: A Father's Search for His Disabled Son (2009)
References
External links
The Boy in the Moon, Globe and Mail
Talking Books, CBC Radio
Charles Taylor Prize citation for The Boy in the Moon
Macmillan Speakers Bureau Profile
Category:Canadian television journalists Category:1954 births Category:Living people Category:CBC Radio hosts Category:The Globe and Mail people Category:People from Lachine, Quebec
↩
↩
↩
