 Infobox ship begin
Infobox ship image
 Ship image=File:SS Clan Ranald ship.tif 200 px SS Clan Ranald ship
 Ship caption=SS Clan Ranald
Infobox Ship Career
 Hide header=
 Ship name= SS Clan Ranald
 Ship owner= Clan Line
 Ship operator=
 Ship registry=
 Ship route=
 Ship ordered=
 Ship builder= W.Doxford & Sons Ltd, Sunderland, England
 Ship original cost=
 Ship yard number=
 Ship way number=
 Ship laid down=
 Ship launched=
 Ship completed=
 Ship christened=
 Ship acquired=
 Ship maiden voyage=
 Ship in service=
 Ship out of service= 31 January 1909
 Ship identification=
 Ship fate= Sunk by unknown cause
 Ship status=
 Ship notes=
Infobox ship characteristics
 Hide header=
 Header caption=
 Ship class=
 Ship tonnage= 3596 gross, 2285 net. 
 Ship displacement=
 Ship length= convert 355 ft m 0
 Ship beam=
 Ship height=
 Ship draught=
 Ship draft=
 Ship depth= convert 22.7 ft m 0
 Ship decks=
 Ship deck clearance=
 Ship ramps=
 Ship ice class=
 Ship sail plan=
 Ship power= Steam
 Ship propulsion= Screw
 Ship speed= 11 knots
 Ship capacity=
 Ship crew= 64
 Ship notes=
SS Clan Ranald was a turret deck ship, with two decks, that sank off the rocky coast near Edithburg in Australia. It is the only turret ship to have been lost in Australian waters, and therefore represents a unique part of Australia's maritime history. The bulk of crew was Asian sailors, known as Lascars. This is considered one of the worst shipwrecks in South Australia where only 24 survived out of the 64 crew members.Halls in Australia's Worst Shipwrecks pp. 115.Coroneos & McKinnon in Shipwrecks of Investigator Strait and the Lower Yorke Peninsula pp.60.
Description
SS Clan Ranald was built in 1900 by Doxford & Sons in Sunderland, UK, as a turret deck ship for the Clan Line Steamers of Glasgow.  The ship measured 355&nbsp;ft in length and had a net tonnage of 2,285 tons.  The turret deck ship design was a modern idea for the beginning of the 18th century, as it was considered seaworthy and economical for carrying bulk grain cargoes. The sides of the vessel curve inwards after reaching the widest point, giving a slight sloping ledge from about midway up the veesels hull. The purpose of this construction, together with increased stoage capacity, is to make the cargo so compacted that it would have minimal shifting during transportation. However, the main advantage of the design is the cost reduction of port charges.Coroneos & McKinnon in Shipwrecks of Investigator Strait and the Lower Yorke Peninsula pp.59. Turret ships offer lower tonnage per ton which could be up to 10% and that the narrow turret deck enabled a reduction in Suez Canal dues where charges were based on deck width and the net tonnage.Coroneos & McKinnon in Shipwrecks of Investigator Strait and the Lower Yorke Peninsula pp.59-60.
Final Voyage
File:Clan Ranald Grave.jpg thumb left right upright Clan Ranald Gravesite
On 15 January 1909 the vessel arrived in Port Adelaide from Mauritius.  At Darlings Mill, the ship took on 39,862 bags of wheat and 28, 451 bags of flour.  A large amount of 638 tons of coal was also loaded, with 170 tons on the top decks.  On the 31st of that month, despite a 4 list to starboard Clan Ranald left the Semaphore Anchorage, bound for South Africa with a crew of 64 people. They ships crew comprises of four Manilamen, Sixteen Calcuttamen and thirty four Lascars.The ship was commanded by Captain A.S. Gladstone.Loney in Wrecks on the SOUTH AUSTRALIAN Coast pp. 114. 
At 2 pm the ship was south of Troubridge Island when it suddenly shifted onto its starboard side at a 45 angle.  The crew rushed onto the deck whilst leaving the engine running.  The starboard deck was submerged and this caused the ship's rudder to sit out of the water. At 4.30 pm a rough wind blew the ship towards Tourbridge Hill. Due to rough seas, the ship's lifeboats had been smashed and the vessel was driven near the cliffs. In their desperation to escape, the crew attempted to construct wooden rafts from debris.  Distress rockets were fired after seeing a nearby ship, the SS Uganda, but strangely they never replied or sent assistance.Halls in Australia's Worst Shipwrecks pp. 123.Department of Environment and Natural Resources: State Heritage Branch in Investigator Strait pp.10 At 10 pm the Clan Ranald capsized and sank in 20 meters of water about 700 meters from the shore, pitching the crew into the sea.  Many were sucked under as the ship sank while others who swam to shore died as they reached the steep cliffs and jagged rocks that were nearly impossible to climb to safety. Others perished due to being subjected to the freezing elements all night.Department of Environment and Natural Resource: State Heritage Branch. S.S. Clan Ranald 1900-1909.
Even though the distress rockets were overlooked by the SS Uganda, some of the Troubridge locals saw them. They rushed to the beach and gave assistance to the any of the surviving crew. The locals also began searching for other survivors on the beach and were shocked by the terrible loss of life they found along the shoreline. Some bodies that were found were battered beyond recognition.Halls in Australia's Worst Shipwrecks pp. 123. Only 36 of the missing bodies were found. The bodies were then buried in Edithburgh Cemetery. The five United Kingdom British officers were buried in the main section and the 31 Lascar crew were buried in a mass grave at the rear of the cemetery.
Survivors
File:Clan Ranald Survivors.jpg thumb right right upright Clan Ranald Survivors
At daylight, the 24 survivors were taken to Edithburgh to return to Adelaide. Out of the 24 survivors four of them were United Kingdom British while the other twenty were Lascars. The four British officers were taken to hotel named Woodcocks Royal Arms Hotel, while the Lascars were placed in the basement of the Prince Alfred Sailors Home.NAA: D596, 1909/687 As part of the White Australia Policy, the Lascar survivors then had their hand print taken and were given a dictation test, which was fixed for them to fail.Brooks, David in Before the wreck: The Adoption Racially Exclusive Immigration Restrictions in South Australia Leading to the Prohibited Immigrant Status of the Coloured Crew of the S.S. Clan Ranald, 1857-1909 pp. 18. As a result, the Lascars were treated as illegal immigrants regardless of their recent tragedy.Brooks, David in Before the wreck: The Adoption Racially Exclusive Immigration Restrictions in South Australia Leading to the Prohibited Immigrant Status of the Coloured Crew of the SS Clan Ranald, 1857-1909 pp. 18. This was due to the terms of the Immigration Restriction Act 1901 which can also be related to the White Australia Policy. Due to this, they were promptly sent to Melbourne to board the Clan McLachlan bound for Colombo. 
However, the Lascars survivors were not all treated badly, they received support from the people of Adelaide. The survivors were given food, clothing and cigarettes whilst they were in custody. Even before departing the Mayor of Adelaide presented each with a monetary gift and wished them well.Brooks, David in Before the wreck: The Adoption Racially Exclusive Immigration Restrictions in South Australia Leading to the Prohibited Immigrant Status of the Coloured Crew of the S.S. Clan Ranald, 1857-1909 pp. 19-20.
Controversies
Questions were raised on why the SS Uganda did not come to give assistance when the distress rockets were fired. The captain of the ship, Captain Kilpatrick, stated that he thought the lights were from Troubridge Lighthouse, and were not distress signals, as a result he continue on according to procedure. This excuse was challenged by the fact that the locals nearby could see and identify the lights. Furthermore, one of the survivors stated that the SS Uganda did answer the distress signal by replying with an answering light. This suggests that they knew what it was but did not came to help them.Halls in Australia's Worst Shipwrecks pp. 125.
Investigation of the cause of the sinking of the Clan Ranald is still undetermined. Many theories have been put forward to try to explain this tragedy. One of these theories was that the vessel struck Marion Reef. However, this was dissmissed as inspection of the hull revealed that there were no holes that indicated that the vessel hit any underwater obstruction.Halls in Australia's Worst Shipwrecks pp. 125. Other theories include, that the water ballast tanks were not emptied or that the sea cock was opened throughout the journey. Some even suggested that most of the crew were drunk at that time.Coroneos & McKinnon in Shipwrecks of Investigator Strait and the Lower Yorke Peninsula pp. 60.
Site Location
The Clan Ranald site was located in 1962 by the South Australian Museum Underwater Historical Research group, a volunteer organisation. At this time the site was deemed to be in a remarkable state of preservation.DENR unpublished site reports The site lies of the southern tip of the Yorke Peninsula in South Australia. The closest town to the site is Edithburg, from which the wreck lies 14 kilometers to the south-west and 1.25 kilometers west of Troubridge Hill in the Troubridge Hill Aquatic Reserve.
:Latitude - 03510'3.7
:Longitude - 13737'14.8 Australia Department of Environment and Natural Resource S.S. Clan Ranald 1900-1909
Site Description
Soon after the wrecking, an inspection was carried out by Marine Board Diver C.Olsen, Coroneos & McKinnon in Shipwrecks of Investigator Strait and the Lower Yorke Peninsula pp.59-60. this inspection found that the Clan Ranald was lying on its starboard side with the top of the turret deck on the seabed and the port side of the hull a dominant feature. The vessel was almost lying bottom up on the sea floor.
A quote from the 1909 Register stated that:
The highest part of the ship is her port bilge sic keel and the starboard bilge keel is about 9 ft. off the bottom. The starboard top sides and the top of the turret had sunk aome distance in the sand. There is a considerable quantity of coal scattered to the eastward of the ship. Reg.9.2.1909: 6d, cited in Coroneos & McKinnon in Shipwrecks of Investigator Strait and the Lower Yorke Peninsula pp.59-60.
The Clan Ranald was lying on an ESE-NWN axis with the bow pointing ESE.
Presently there are still considerable remains of the Clan Ranald left on the site. Almost the entire hull watercraft hull has collapsed, except for a portion that is held up by the port side boiler. The double hulled bottom of the bow is standing vertical and the bow section has collapsed forwards and downwards into two parts. There are still enormous boilers that remain on site, approximately 2-3 times the size of a diver and provide a spectacular site for anybody who visits the site Coroneos & McKinnon in Shipwrecks of Investigator Strait and the Lower Yorke Peninsula p.61. and the port main boiler has rolled out and is free of the hull remains. Underneath the collapsed hull, the engine still remains relatively intact.
Other interesting features of the site include: 
 The Propeller: This still remains on the site, however, illegal salvage using explosive destroyed and removed the blades. The propeller shaft is still visible under the collapsed hull.
 At the bow area, the windlass and a large mound of chain remain.
 The rudder also remains on site, although it has been detached from the stern, possibly as a result of explosives used to remove the propeller blades.
The highest part of the wreck sits 6 meters above the seabed, the port bilge keel and the double bottom hull which is resting on the starboard main boiler.DENR Unpublished report on the SS Clan Ranald
Site Condition
Despite the large amount of vessel remains, the Department of Environment and Natural Resources South Australia, which manages all protected shipwreck sites has classified the site as poorly preserved.Coroneos & McKinnon in Shipwrecks of Investigator Strait and the Lower Yorke Peninsula p.61. They define 'poorly preserved' as signifying that the hull is still intact to the turn of the bilge. The frames and plating/planking of the hull watercraft hull have collapsed. The stern and bow may still be intact and the vessel's boilers or engines are still in their position in relation to where they were orignially on the vessel.Coroneos & McKinnon in Shipwrecks of Investigator Strait and the Lower Yorke Peninsula p.24.
Salvage of the SS Clan Ranald
There was never any formal salvage of the site. However, since the invention of recreational SCUBA diving in the 1960s, looters have been frequenting the site and noticeable materials have been removed. Such materials that have been targeted are non-ferrous materials, such as copper alloy piping off the boilers and any interesting personal artefacts. Looters have also used explosives on the site, including destroying the propeller blades.Coroneos & McKinnon in Shipwrecks of Investigator Strait and the Lower Yorke Peninsula p.61.
It is also rumoured that the cargo manifest of the Clan Ranald is in the hands of a resident of Edithburg who recovered it from the beach after the loss.Coroneos & McKinnon in Shipwrecks of Investigator Strait and the Lower Yorke Peninsula p.61.
Conservation of the Site
Management of a site, conservation, is determined by the level of threat to the site. This can be from human interaction with the site or natural conditions such as water currents and silt movement. The Department of Environment and Natural Resources South Australiareport on the condition of the Clan Ranald site outlined these risks.
 Human impacts - High. This was discerned by the remaining artefacts such as ship's fittings and personal possessions of the crew that are still visible and could be pilfered from the site. Also damage from dragging anchors is highly likely.
 Natural impacts - Low. The environmental state of the site is in a relatively stable condition. However, the large, upright remains, such as parts of the bow and stern and the wreckage surrounding the boilers, are in a higher risk of deteriorating. Illegal looting and salvage has destroyed large sections and markedly increased the rate of deterioration of the site.Coroneos & McKinnon in Shipwrecks of Investigator Strait and the Lower Yorke Peninsula p.61.
The wreck has deteriorated in the past few years due to damage done by mooring anchors of the remains, but also the depletion of marine life in the area because of overfishing.Australia Department of Environment and Natural Resource S.S. Clan Ranald 1900-1909
Assessment of Significance of the SS Clan Ranald Site
The Clan Ranald is one of the most tragic and unique shipwrecks in Australian waters. It represents one of the worst shipwrecks in Australian history with a massive loss of life. Combined with the grave sites of the officers and the crew in the nearby Edithburg Cemetery, the Clan Ranald is a somber reminder of a huge tragedy. For this reason, the wreck site and the event itself is very important to the community of the lower Yorke Peninsula. Not only because of the disastrous loss of life, but also because they played a major role in aiding the survivors. Even to this day, if you visit the graves, there are always fresh flowers near the headstones.
The following is a poem written about the wrecking event.
The Wreck of the Clan Ranald
Down the Port River, on a mid-summer day
The steamer, Clan Ranald, swept proudly away.
Bound for the Cape, with a light-hearted crew
What was in store for them God alone knew.
At four bells she was struck by a big angry sea,
She listed right over; her decks washed a-lea.
She was crippled  and signalled for help to the shore,
But ere it arrived the ship was no more.
Down went the Clan Ranald, a most sad disaster,
For forty poor souls were called to their Master. 
Rescuers on shore all help they were giving,
They were risking their lives for the sake of those living.
For, in utter darkness they were battling that night
In surf they were rushing to save, black and white.
Let us pity those living, and pray for those still,
Who were washed to Eternity off Troubridge Hill.
Archibald Deacon, 1909
The remains of the vessel provide a haunting and fascinating dive for anybody who ventures onto the site, the large boilers and remains of the bow and stern also create a unique and interesting dive. The remains are such that one only has to have little knowledge of the vessel to understand what features are present. On top of this, the site is significant simply as a dive site, the abundance of marine life that are present and the features provide a wonderful and popular dive.
:Dive Information
:Depth: 18m
:Visibility: 10m
:Bottom Type: Sand
:Best Diving time: FebruaryApril, when northerly winds are prevailing.
Study of the remains of the SS Clan Ranald would be useful because this type of vessel, the turret deck ship, was unusual and only featured in maritime designs for a short period.Coroneos & McKinnon in Shipwrecks of Investigator Strait and the Lower Yorke Peninsula p.61. This is possible because of the state of the remains and the visible structures and features of the vessel on site.
Archaeological study into the personal possessions that remain on the site could reveal great amounts of insight into the class of United Kingdom British seaman, often neglected and seen as an 'underclass'. Furthermore differences between the officers and the predominantly Lascar crew would make an interesting study, especially in comparison with other noteable wrecks, such as the Sydney Cove ship, which also had a predominantly Indian crew.Coroneos & McKinnon in Shipwrecks of Investigator Strait and the Lower Yorke Peninsula p.61.
Legal Status of the SS Clan Ranald
The Clan Ranald was discovered in 1962 by the South Australian Museum Underwater Research Group.Australia Department of Environment and Natural Resource S.S. Clan Ranald 1900-1909 This group then purchased the remains from the Clan Line of Steamers in London.Coroneos & McKinnon in Shipwrecks of Investigator Strait and the Lower Yorke Peninsula p.62. The motive behind purchasing the wreck was to stop divers from accessing the site and therefore reduce the deterioration of the wreck site. In 1988 ownership was handed over to the government.
SS Clan Ranald is protected under the Commonwealth Historic Shipwrecks Act 1976 and also the South Australian Historic Shipwrecks Act 1981.South Australian Legislation http://www.legislation.sa.gov.au This means that the site and all of teh artefacts associated with the site have been declared historic and protected. No artefacts should be removed from the site and damage to the site is illegal.
Due to its location situaited within a Marine Reserve, the Troubridge Hill Aquatic Reserve established 1983, it is also protected by Fisheries Act 1982 which covers approximately 4&nbsp;km of the area.Stienberg in The Historic Shipwreck Australian: A Plan of Management, MAGNT RESEACH REPORT NO.9 pp. 98
Most importantly, the Clan Ranald is a main feature of the Department of Environment and Natural Resources South Australia Investigator Strait Shipwreck Heritage Trail, this means that along with a few other significant shipwrecks, the Clan Ranald is promoted to the public as a way of educating the public in the importance of Australia's historical shipwrecks.
See also
Clan Line
Historic Shipwreck Act 1976
Immigration Restriction Act 1901
White Australia Policy
External Links
http://http://www.environment.sa.gov.au/Heritage/Heritage_places_and_areas/Ships_graveyards/Shipwreck_trails/Investigator_Strait Investigator Strait Shipwreck Heritage Trail
http://www.southaustralia.com/Yorke_Peninsula_Self.pdf Guide to Driving around Yorke Peninsula
http://www.southaustralia.com/YorkePeninsulaMaritimeHistory.aspx Yorke Peninsula Maritime History
Notes
reflist
References
Brooks, David 2004. Before the wreck: The Adoption Racially Exclusive Immigration Restrictions in South Australia Leading to the Prohibited Immigrant Status of the Coloured Crew of the SS Clan Ranald, 1857-1909 Thesis. Adelaide University.
Coroneos, Cosmos & McKinnon, Robert 1997 Shipwrecks of the Investigator Strait and the Lower Yorke Peninsula ISBN 0958849633
Department of Environment and Natural Resources, South Australia S.S. Clan Ranald 1900-1909
Department of Environment and Natural Resources, South Australia, unpublished reports on the 'SS Clan Ranald'
Government of South Australia, Attorney-General's Department, South Australian Legislation accessed on the 17/5/2011 at http://www.legislation.sa.gov.au
Halls, Chris 1978 Australias Worst Shipwrecks ISBN 0727009494
Loney, Jack 1993 Wrecks on the SOUTH AUSTRALIAN Coast ISBN 0646147447
National Archives of Australia: Department of Customs, D596/0; 1909/687; The Wreck of the Clan Ranald.
Russell, Smith 1998 Curosities of South Australia ISBN 1876087145
Stienberg, David 2001. The Historic Shipwreck Australian: A Plan of Management, MAGNT RESEACH REPORT NO.9. Darwin, Australia: Department of Arts & Museum of the Northern Territory.
DEFAULTSORT:Ss Clan Ranald 1900
Category:1900 ships
