 The Lion of Knidos is the name for a colossal ancient Greek statue that was discovered near the ancient port of Knidos, south-west Asia Minor (now near Dat&lt;U+00E7&gt;a in Turkey). Soon after its discovery, the statue was shipped to London where it became part of the British Museum's collection. There is some debate about the age of the sculpture but in general scholarly opinion dates it to the 2nd century BC. Since 2000, it has been prominently displayed on a plinth under the roof of the Queen Elizabeth II Great Court.1
Description
This sculpture of a recumbent lion was carved from the same marble used to build the Parthenon. It was quarried from Mount Pentelikon near Athens. The lion is in excellent condition; only the lower jaw and front legs are missing and its eyes were probably once inlaid with glass. The statue is greater than life-size; it weighs seven tonnes and measures 2.89 metres long and 1.82 metres high.
Discovery
The Lion of Knidos was found in 1858 by the British archaeologist Richard Popplewell Pullan as he walked the cliffs near what is now the Turkish town of Dat&lt;U+00E7&gt;a. Popplewell was three miles away from where he was helping Charles Thomas Newton who was excavating the ancient Greek city of Knidos.2 The statue crowned a 20 metre high funerary monument, that had commanding views over the sea and may have once acted as a navigation aid for passing sailors. The monument may have been destroyed in an earthquake, as the statue was found lying on its side some distance from the tomb. The Knidos Lion was transported with some difficulty further down the coast, where it was loaded onto the naval ship HMS Supply by Robert Murdoch Smith and shipped to London.3
In 2008 the Turkish town of Dat&lt;U+00E7&gt;a petitioned the British Ministry of Culture and Tourism for the return of the two statues known as the Lion of Knidos and the Demeter of Knidos.4
References
Further reading
C. Bruns-Ozgan, Knidos: A Guide to the Ancient Site, Konya 2004
G.Bean, Cnidus, Turkey beyond the Maeander, London 1980, chapter 12, pp 111-127
Category:Greek and Roman objects in the British Museum Category:Statues Category:Marble sculptures Category:Hellenistic sculpture
British Museum Collection The Lion of Knidos, British Museum, retrieved 30 November 2013↩
Turkey wants Knidos Lion to be returned, Elginism.com, retrieved 30 November 2013↩
