Loveland is a Home Rule Municipality that is the second most populous city in Larimer County, Colorado, United States. Loveland is situated  north of the Colorado State Capitol in Denver. Loveland is the 14th most populous city in Colorado. The United States Census Bureau that in 2010 the population of the city of Loveland was 66,859. The city forms part of the Fort Collins-Loveland Metropolitan Statistical Area, as well as the Denver-Aurora-Boulder Combined Statistical Area and the Front Range Urban Corridor. The city's public schools are part of the Thompson R2-J School District.
History
The city was founded in 1877 along the newly-constructed line of the Colorado Central Railroad, near its crossing of the Big Thompson River. It was named in honor of William A.H. Loveland, the president of the Colorado Central Railroad. The city was founded one mile (1.6 km) upstream from the existing small settlement of St. Louis, the buildings of which were moved to the site of Loveland. For the first half of the 20th century the town was dependent on agriculture. The primary crops in the area were sugar beets and sour cherries. In 1901, the Great Western Sugar Company built a factory in Loveland, which remained as a source of employment until its closure in 1985. During the late 1920s the Spring Glade orchard was the largest cherry orchard west of the Mississippi River. At that time the cherry orchards produced more than $1 million worth of cherries per year. A series of droughts, attacks of blight and finally a killer freeze destroyed the industry. By 1960 cherries were no longer farmed. In the late 20th century, the economy diversified with the arrival of manufacturing facilities by Hewlett-Packard, Teledyne, and Hach, a water quality analysis equipment manufacturer. A new medical center has added a substantial amount of employment in that sector as well.
The city is south of Fort Collins, its larger neighbor and the county seat. The two cities have been steadily growing towards each other over the last several decades and are considered to be a single metropolitan area by the U.S. government. The establishment of county-owned open space between the two communities in the 1990s was intended to create a permanent buffer to contiguous growth. Loveland has aggressively expanded its incorporated limits eastward to embrace the interchange of Interstate 25 and U.S. Highway 34, and is currently developing the area. In the last decade, the intersection has become a primary commercial hub of northern Colorado, with the construction of shopping centers and the Budweiser Events Center. A new medical center and mall have also been built on the Interstate 25 and U.S. Highway 34 interchange. This area is known as Centerra. The interchange is shared with its smaller neighbor Johnstown, of Weld County.
Geography and climate
Loveland is located at  (40.404789, -105.085868).
According to the United States Census Bureau, the city has a total area of 25.5 square miles (66.1 km&lt;U+00B2&gt;), of which, 24.6 square miles (63.6 km&lt;U+00B2&gt;) of it is land and 0.9 square miles (2.4 km&lt;U+00B2&gt;) of it (3.68%) is water.
The city is south of Fort Collins, its larger neighbor and the county seat. The northward city limits are now contiguous with those of Windsor, which has expanded westward from Weld County across Interstate 25.
Loveland Pass, also named after William A.H. Loveland, is not located near the town of Loveland.
Loveland has a semi-arid climate (K&lt;U+00F6&gt;ppen climate classification BSk).
Demographics
As of the census1 of 2000, there were 50,608 people, 19,741 households, and 14,035 families residing in the city. The population density was 2,059.7 people per square mile (795.3/km&lt;U+00B2&gt;). There were 20,299 housing units at an average density of 826.2 per square mile (319.0/km&lt;U+00B2&gt;). The racial makeup of the city was 92.85% White, 0.37% Black, 0.69% Native American, 0.83% Asian, 0.03% Pacific Islander, 3.21% from other races, and 2.02% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 8.57% of the population.
There were 19,741 households out of which 35.3% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 57.5% were married couples living together, 9.8% had a female householder with no husband present, and 28.9% were non-families. 23.4% of all households were made up of individuals and 8.8% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 2.55 and the average family size was 3.01.
In the city the population was spread out with 26.9% under the age of 18, 7.8% from 18 to 24, 30.6% from 25 to 44, 22.1% from 45 to 64, and 12.5% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 36 years. For every 100 females there were 96.1 males. For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 92.4 males.
The median income for a household in the city was $47,119, and the median income for a family was $54,337. Males had a median income of $38,971 versus $26,714 for females. The per capita income for the city was $21,889. About 4.0% of families and 5.7% of the population were below the poverty line, including 6.7% of those under age 18 and 5.0% of those age 65 or over.
Education
Continuing education
Aims Community College
Colorado Christian University (Northern Colorado Center satellite site)
High schools
Harold Ferguson High School
Loveland High School
Mountain View High School
Thompson Valley High School
Middle schools
Bill Reed Middle School
Conrad Ball Middle School
Lucile Erwin Middle School
Walt Clark Middle School
New Vision Charter School
Elementary schools
B.F. Kitchen Elementary School
Big Thompson Elementary School
Carrie Martin Elementary School
Centennial Elementary School
Cottonwood Plains Elementary School
Coyote Ridge Elementary School
Garfield Elementary School
Laurene Edmondson Elementary School
Lincoln Elementary School
Mary Blair Elementary School
Monroe Elementary School
Namaqua Elementary School
New Vision Charter School
Sarah Milner Elementary School
Stansberry Elementary School
Truscott Elementary School
Winona Elementary School
Van Buren Elementary School
Private schools
Campion Academy
HMS Richards Adventist School
Immanuel Lutheran School
Heritage Christian Academy
Loveland Protestant Reformed Christian School
Resurrection Christian School
Saint John the Evangelist Catholic School
Seven Oaks Academy &amp; Little Acorns
Transportation
Allegiant Air.com2 offers regular passenger airplane service into the nearby Fort Collins / Loveland Airport. Denver International Airport, which is  to the south, is served by nearly twenty airlines. Loveland can be approached from Denver by car via Interstate 25.
U.S. Highway 34 runs East to West into the mountains through Loveland. It becomes Eisenhower Blvd. in the city, dividing it in half. Loveland's two main zip codes (80538 and 80537) are separated by this highway.
The city bus system in Loveland is called COLT -- City of Loveland Transit.
Loveland is connected to Fort Collins, Berthoud, and Longmont via the FLEX regional bus route.
Atmosphere
 The Loveland-Ft Collins metropolitan area has received numerous awards as a great place to live, by Money Magazine, USA Today, AARP the Magazine, and others. There is a large population of artists in Loveland, which has drawn three foundries, an art museum, and the annual sculpture shows in August. Loveland has a reputation as being somewhat conservative in its politics, with a large and active population of Evangelical Christians. The city is a major business center for northern Colorado.
The city is located in the Colorado Front Range region at the base of the foothills just east of the mouth of Big Thompson River Canyon at the intersection of U.S. Highway 34 and U.S. Highway 287. Longs Peak and other mountains of the Front Range are visible from much of the city. Lake Loveland, an early agricultural reservoir in the irrigation system of the region, is located in the city limits and provides a recreational facility for the city residents.
Because of its location along U.S. 34, at one of the principal access routes to Estes Park and Rocky Mountain National Park, Loveland receives a significant amount of pass-through tourist traffic, especially in the summer months. In addition, the city serves as a &quot;bedroom&quot; community to commuters in many directions: to employment locations in Boulder, Westminster and other parts of the Denver Metropolitan area; and also to the college towns of Fort Collins (CSU), Greeley (UNC), and Boulder, (CU).
The Valentine Re-Mailing Program
Loveland is the home of the Valentine Re-Mailing Program. For decades people from across the world have sent their valentines to Loveland, Colorado, to be hand-stamped with a cachet and verse, and a specially designed postal cancelation. A new verse and stamp are selected each year through a contest held by the Loveland Chamber of Commerce and residents can submit their poems and artwork to be judged. On average, this program re-mails more than 160,000 cards from the United States and more than 110 countries. Loveland&lt;U+2019&gt;s Valentine Re-mailing Program has inspired many other Valentine&lt;U+2019&gt;s Day programs including the Official Loveland Valentine, Miss Loveland Valentine and the Thompson Valley Rotary Heart&lt;U+2019&gt;s Program. Information on all these programs is available through the Loveland Chamber of Commerce website. The Loveland Chamber of Commerce and the Loveland Post Office sponsor the Loveland Valentine Re-mailing Program.
Loveland&lt;U+2019&gt;s Valentine Re-mailing Program began in January 1947 by Ted Thompson and Elmer Ivers, the Loveland postmaster after Ivers received about 30 valentines from individuals requesting to have the cards postmarked from Loveland for, &lt;U+201C&gt;a romantic extra touch.&lt;U+201D&gt; The two thought re-mailing valentines would be an opportunity to advertise Loveland, and the Loveland Chamber of Commerce agreed to promote the service. Thompson designed a cachet with the message, &lt;U+201C&gt;A Valentine Greeting from Sweetheart Town, Loveland, Colorado,&lt;U+201D&gt; and the image was a heart pierced by an arrow over the Rocky Mountains. The cachet was used twice, then Thompson started the tradition of changing it each year at the request of collectors. Since then, a different verse and design have been used every year.
The public arts program
Loveland has just under 300 pieces of art in its public arts collection. The arts collection consists primarily of sculpture; however, the collection also includes murals and other flat work. Over 100 pieces of the city's sculpture can be found in Loveland's Benson Sculpture Garden.
The Sculpture in the Park show, hosted by the Loveland High Plains Arts Council, takes place annually in August and exhibits artwork from artists from the United States and the world.
Loveland Chamber of Commerce
The Loveland Chamber of Commerce is a membership-based organization of more than 700 companies and 16,000 individuals in northern Colorado and serves as the driving force for business in Loveland, promoting business and community prosperity. The Chamber promotes business and community prosperity by focusing on four core competencies: connections, visibility, education and advocacy. It plays an important role in advocating for businesses regarding public policy. The Loveland Chamber is one of the founding members of the Northern Colorado Legislative Alliance, along with the Fort Collins and Greeley chambers of commerce. The organization&lt;U+2019&gt;s mission is to lead and influence local, state and federal policy issues affecting the business interests of northern Colorado. With the assistance of a legislative affairs committee, the Loveland Chamber takes a position on certain legislation and campaigns in the community for or against it.
The Chamber is an essential contributor to the business community by providing an array of events, programs and opportunities to help its investors, both large and small, gain the skills and resources necessary to thrive and prosper in today's economy. The Chamber is responsible for the Old Fashioned Corn Roast Festival, one of Loveland&lt;U+2019&gt;s largest community festivals and the world famous Loveland Valentine Re-mailing Program in addition to supporting day-to-day events in the Loveland community.
Notable natives and residents
Wayne Allard - Former United States Senator from Colorado
Jeremy Bloom - Olympic skier. Former wide receiver and punt returner at the University of Colorado. Drafted by the Philadelphia Eagles in 2006.
Jeff Byers - Offensive Guard for University of Southern California.
Alexi Grewal - Olympic Gold Medalist
Kyle Howard - American film and television actor
Jeff Lucas - Writer/ Broadcaster
Don Marostica - Colorado Director of Economic Development
Marilyn Martinez - Comic
Scot McCloughan - Former San Francisco 49ers general manager
James Niehues - Panoramic illustrator famous for his ski area trail maps
Bucky Bakes - Fashion Designer and Syk Fuk. Lead singer and guitarist for Syc Bois (Yo!)
See also
Colorado municipalities
Loveland Chamber of Commerce
Medical Center of the Rockies
References
External links
CDOT map of the City of Loveland
Loveland Chamber of Commerce
Loveland Reporter-Herald
bg:&lt;U+041B&gt;&lt;U+044A&gt;&lt;U+0432&gt;&lt;U+043B&gt;&lt;U+0435&gt;&lt;U+043D&gt;&lt;U+0434&gt; ca:Loveland (Colorado) de:Loveland (Colorado) es:Loveland (Colorado) fr:Loveland it:Loveland (Colorado) sw:Loveland, Colorado ht:Loveland, Kolorado nl:Loveland (Colorado) pt:Loveland (Colorado) vi:Loveland, Colorado vo:Loveland (Colorado)
  Category:Populated places in Larimer County, Colorado Category:Cities in Colorado
Census Data: Colorado By Place↩
Allegiant Air Official site.↩
