Quinsigamond Community College (colloq: QCC, Quinsig) is a public, two-year academic institution in Worcester, Massachusetts. A commuter school, the college has an enrollment of over 8,000 students in its Associate's degree and certification programs. A number of students are enrolled in transfer programs with the intent of continuing on to a four-year college or university, often the University of Massachusetts or Worcester State University through guaranteed-acceptance programs.
Founded in 1963, QCC occupies the Greendale campus formerly owned by Assumption College. The College maintains a satellite campus at the former Worcester Common Outlets, now known as City Square. Quinsigamond offers night and summer classes at night at Southbridge High School, as well as at a few other locations in and around Worcester County. Quinsigamond has over 20 majors to choose from.
QCC provides non-credit courses and workshops for people with various interests. Programs are offered around Worcester by the college at the Blackstone Valley Regional Vocational Technical High School in Upton and the Senior Center in Worcester. Evening classes are offered by the college in Southbridge High School, Southbridge.
771 full- and part-time faculty are employed by the College. The College offers the low tuition fee of $129 per credit for Massachusetts residents and $335 for out-of-state students.
Notable alumni
Jay Cutler: Professional Bodybuilder and three time Mr. Olympia
Tanyon Sturtze: Major League baseball player
Jennifer Garza: New England Patriots cheerleader
Magdalena Rivas: Contestant on America's Next Top Model (Cycle 3)
Brooke Brodack: Amateur filmmaker, famous for posting videos on the popular video sharing site, YouTube
External links
QCC Homepage
1 Quad-A Tutoring Methodology
Colleges of Worcester Consortium Homepage
Category:Community colleges in Massachusetts Category:New England Association of Schools and Colleges Category:Educational institutions established in 1963 Category:Universities and colleges in Worcester, Massachusetts
