Hurricane Claudette was the third tropical storm and first hurricane of the 2003 Atlantic hurricane season. A fairly long-lived July hurricane, Claudette moved through the Caribbean Sea and Gulf of Mexico before striking central Texas as a strong Category 1 hurricane on the Saffir-Simpson Hurricane Scale. Its path and intensity was uncertain throughout its lifetime, including prior to actually forming, which resulted in widespread preparation through its path.
Claudette was the first hurricane to make landfall in July in the United States since Hurricane Bertha in the 1996 season. The hurricane caused one death moderate damage and in Texas, mostly from strong winds and extensive beach erosion also occurred.
Storm history
A tropical wave moved off the coast of Africa on July 1. It steadily organized as it moved westward, and it resembled a tropical depression by July 7. However, surface reports and Reconaissance Aircraft indicated the system remained a tropical wave. The wave produced tropical storm force winds as it moved through the Lesser Antilles on July 8, but remained a tropical wave until it reached the eastern Caribbean Sea. Because it had tropical storm force winds, the system was upgraded immediately to Tropical Storm Claudette after it developed a low-level circulation.
Claudette quickly strengthened over the warm waters of the Caribbean, and it reached winds just shy of hurricane strength by early on July 9 while south of Puerto Rico. Possibly due to its fast forward motion, the storm became disorganized and weakened. Conditions briefly became more favorable over the western Caribbean, and Claudette reached hurricane status for 6 hours on the 10th. Soon after, the storm encounted unfavorable upper level winds and weakened to a tropical storm. In response to a break in the subtropical ridge it turned to the west-northwest, causing Claudette to make its first landfall at Puerto Morelos on the Yucatan Peninsula on the 11th as a 60 mph (95 km/h) storm.
 Claudette moved to the northwest over the Gulf of Mexico and gradually restrengthened. Upper level winds steadily decreased, and Claudette again became a hurricane late on July 14. It strengthened quickly prior to landfall, and struck Port O'Connor, Texas on July 15 as a 90 mph (145 km/h) hurricane. Some initial estimates suggested that Claudette had reached Category 2 with sustained winds of up to 100 mph (160 km/h) based on unofficial observations which were not backed up.1
As slow as Claudette was to strengthen, it was also slow to dissipate over land. It maintained tropical storm intensity for over 24 hours after landfall, a rarity for a storm as weak as Claudette. Most tropical systems weaken rapidly after landfall, as they are separated from the warm waters that power them. The storm finally lost its low-level circulation early on July 17, although its rainfall and upper-level circulation continued on into the Pacific Ocean.
Preparations
Mexican officials issued a tropical storm warning 37 hours prior to making landfall between Chetumal and Cabo Catoche in the Yucat&lt;U+00E1&gt;n Peninsula province of Quintana Roo. That was upgraded to a hurricane warning around a day before landfall, but that was downgraded when the storm weakened just 13 hours prior to landfall. 2 The Mexican government declared a state of emergency in the path of the storm, and declared an evacuation order for 1,500 citizens in Quintana Roo. There, residents remained calm during the evacuation, and peacefully taped up windows. 3 Tourists left nightclubs for supermarket to stock up, among other items, beer, a comodity that was banned at midnight. Schools were set up as shelters, while police enforced tourists to remain in their hotels. 4
24 hours prior to Claudette making landfall, Calhoun County officials issued a voluntary evacuation for Western Galveston Island, including Jamaica Beach. The Emergency Phone Notification System notified citizens in the evening to avoid evacuating during the night. Many citizens listened to the evacuation, some of whom remembered the flooding from Tropical Storm Frances five years before. 5 Claudette's consistant changing in its path caused uncertainty over the strength and location of its final landfall. 6 Because of this, no shelters were open during the passage of Claudette, forcing citizens to ride out the hurricane. 7
In addition, Hurricane Claudette affected the oil industry. Chevron, Shell Oil, Marathon Oil, Unocal Corporation, and Anadarko Petroleum Corporation all limited production and evacuated many of their workers. Chevron, which evacuated more than 1,800 workers in the Gulf of Mexico, lost about 30% of its daily production, which included 92,000 barrels of oil and 236 million cubic feet of natural gas each day. Shell limited their oil totals to around 15% and natural gas totals to around 4%, while Marathon lowered their daily total to 2% for oil and 1.5% of its natural gas production. Unocal temporarily closed 23 rigs, and Anadarko shut down 11 rigs during the storm's duration. 8
Impact
 Outside of Texas, Hurricane Claudette caused little damage throughout its lifetime, mainly due to its weak nature. In all, damage totaled to $180 million (2003 USD), while the storm caused one direct and two indirect deaths. One of the the indirect deaths occurred from a man having a heart attack while surfing in the eastern Gulf of Mexico.
Caribbean Sea
As a tropical wave prior to forming, Claudette dropped torrential rainfall and brought strong winds to the island of Saint Lucia. The George F. L. Charles Airport in Castries reported a wind gust of 52 mph (84 km/h), while other parts of the island experienced nearly horizontal rainfall from the gusts. On the northern and eastern portion of the island, the strong winds ripped off roops and downed trees across roadways. 9 Overall, damage was light, and amounted to $1.1 million (2003 USD). 10
On Jamaica, the storm caused wind gusts of 45 mph (70 km/h) in Montego Bay. 11 Forecasters predicted high tides, strong waves, and up to 6 inches (150 mm) of rain on the island, though exact totals are unknown. 12 Many fishermen moved their boats from the water to safety, while a cruise line diverted three ships. 13
 In the Cayman Islands, where the storm remained 165 miles (265 km) away at its closest point, rainfall totals ranged from 1 to 3 inches (25 to 75 mm). 14 On the south side of Grand Cayman, Claudette caused wave heights of around 10 feet (3 m), while the western side received little. Also on Grand Cayman, the storm caused winds of 35 to 40 mph (55 to 65 km/h), causing minor tree damage but little else. 15
In Canc&lt;U+00FA&gt;n on the Mexican portion of the Yucat&lt;U+00E1&gt;n Peninsula, Claudette lashed strong waves to the coastline. 16 While crossing the peninsula, the storm dropped moderate rainfall, including a total of 3.22 inches (81 mm) in Cancun. 17 Winds were fairly moderate, causing the Canc&lt;U+00FA&gt;n International Airport to delay several flights, though there were no cancellations. In all, Claudette sank a few small boats and flooded a few streets in Canc&lt;U+00FA&gt;n, though damage was minor in the Yucat&lt;U+00E1&gt;n Peninsula. 18
Texas
 Upon making landfall on the central Texan coast, Claudette caused a strong storm surge, amounting to a maximum of 5.3 feet (1.6 m) in Galveston. In addition, Freeport reported a storm tide of 9.15 feet (2.8 m). The storm tide represents the actual rise of water, while the storm surge lowers the recorded rise by the astronomical high tide. Claudette produced moderate rainfall across southern Texas, peaking at 6.5 inches in Tilden. In Matagorda, the local weather station measured winds of 75 mph, the only official report of hurricane force winds along the coastline. However, several offshore oil rigs reported winds of up to 90 mph (120 km/h), and one unofficial reading in Port O'Connor indicated winds of 95.5 mph (135 km/h). This report would suggest the storm was a low-end Category 2 hurricane, though this contradicts Reconaissance Aircraft data of a lesser intensity. 19
 Severe beach erosion occurred from High Island to Freeport, though large geo-tubes reduced the erosion on Galveston Island and the Bolivar Peninsula. 20 The outer bands of the hurricane spawned two tornadoes. One was an Fujita scale F1 that caused damage to several buildings in Palacios, and the other damaged homes in Port Lavaca.21
Widespread flooding and gusty winds destroyed 204 houses along the southeast Texas coastline, most of which occurred in Matagorda County. In addition, the winds damaged 1,407 homes, with 144 of them being severely damaged. The wind also damage 147 businesses, of which 64 were either destroyed or severely damaged. 22 Strong winds downed numerous power lines, leaving around 74,000 without power in the immediate aftermath. 23 Overall, Claudette caused $180 million (2003 USD) in damage in Texas and one death from a fallen tree. Also, the storm was indirectly responsible for a death when a tree fell on a person in the cleanup of the storm. 24
Lack of retirement
Due to the relatively moderate damage, the name Claudette was not retired and will be used again in the .
See also
List of notable Atlantic hurricanes
External links
[http://www.nhc.noaa.gov/2003claudette.shtml? NHC Claudette Report]
Notes
Claudette (2003) Claudette (2003) Claudette (2003) Claudette (2003)
[http://www.nhc.noaa.gov/2003claudette.shtml? NHC Claudette Report]↩
Mexico declares state of emergency, evacuates residents in path of Claudette↩
Tropical Storm Claudette makes for Mexico's Yucatan↩
Jamaica Beach Texas Preliminary Claudette Report↩
Hurricane Claudette visits Calhoun County↩
Storm Threat Shuts Gulf Oil Production↩
St. Lucia reports in the 2003 Atlantic hurricane season↩
Saint Lucia: More than EC$3m in damage from Tropical Storm Claudette↩
Tropical Storm Claudette Aims for Yucatan↩
Claudette Nears Jamaica↩
Cayman Islands Reports in the 2003 Atlantic hurricane season↩
Claudette's damage light in Cancun↩
Southeast Texas Hurricane Chronology↩
Two dead in Claudette's wake↩
