  Burlington Street is a road in Hamilton, Ontario, stretching along the south shore of Hamilton Harbour in Lake Ontario. Burlington Street has four different status along the route. In its western terminus, it is a collector route ending at Bay Street North. Upon the intersection at Wellington Street, the road becomes an arterial route with four lanes.
History
Burlington Street's original name was Industrial Road. It derives its name from its proximity to Hamilton Harbour, which used to be called Burlington Bay. After World War II, when Hamilton was at its industrial peak, Burlington Street was the address of some of the city's most prestigious manufacturing companies. In the 1950s, the Canadian head offices of Stelco, Dofasco, Firestone, International Harvester, Procter &amp; Gamble and Westinghouse were situated on or close to Burlington Street. 1
Landmarks
  Note: Listing of Landmarks from West to East.
Hamilton Waterfront Trail
Bayfront Park/ Pier 4 Park
Hamilton Harbour Commission Building
Eastwood Park/ Eastwood Arena
Hamilton Port Authority, Administration Office
Lakeport Brewing Company
Liquid Air Ltd.
Otis Elevator Buildings (2), site of Otis Elevator Company, (1902-1987) and Studebaker of Canada, (1948-1966) 2 Today used as a warehouse by Stelco and various other North End industries. Talk of converting it to a Movie Studio.
Stelco (steel company)
Dofasco (steel company)
National Steel Car (builders of railway cars)
Canada Pipe Company Ltd.
Proscor (scrap &amp; waste management)
Columbian Chemicals Canada Ltd.
Parkdale Warehouse &amp; Distribution
Orlick Industries Ltd. (headquarters)
Museum of Steam &amp; Technology
Communities
Note: List of neighbourhoods from North to South. 3
North End - Everything north of the Canadian National Railway tracks
Parkview West
Road Information
North End Industrial, walking tour
Official Names: Burlington Street West, Burlington Street East
Municipalities: Hamilton
Length: 8.5 km
Zonings: Mainly industrial zonings (steel factories), and spits of parklands and residential areas towards the west
Western Terminus: Bay Street
Eastern Terminus:  Queen Elizabeth Way
Unique Road Status
Two lanes collector route from Bay Street to Wellington Street; a four lane arterial route from Wellington Street to McKinstry Street. A two lane one-way arterial street from McKinley Street to Ottawa Street. From Ottawa Street on to QEW, the road is an expressway with speed limit of 60 km/h.
Exit List
Exit Number&lt;U+2020&gt; (Estimate Kilometer Post from QEW)
Intersecting Road(s)
Destination of Intersecting Road(s)
1
 Queen Elizabeth Way
Toronto
Mississauga
St.Catharines
Niagara Falls
United States of America
1A (500 meters from QEW)
Woodward Avenue
Parkville
McQuesten
1B (1250 meters from QEW)
Parkdale Avenue
McQuesten
Normanhurst
Glenview
2 (2 km from QEW)
Strathearne Avenue
Windermere Basin
4 (3.5 km from QEW)
Ottawa Street
Industrial Drive
Crown Point
The Delta
North End
&lt;U+2020&gt; Exit Number is not officially recognized.
Roads that are parallel with Burlington Street
   Note: With the exception of Industrial Drive, all these routes are south of Burlington Street
Lower City Roads:
Industrial Drive, (runs parallel w/ Burlington Street from Gage Avenue North to Ottawa Street North)
Burlington Street, West/East
Barton Street West/East
Cannon Street West/East
Wilson Street
King William Street
King Street West/East
Main Street West/East; - Queenston Road
Jackson Street East
Hunter Street West/East
Augusta Street
Charlton Avenue West/East
Aberdeen Avenue
Niagara Escarpment (Mountain) Roads:
Concession Street
Fennell Avenue West/East
Mohawk Road West/East
Limeridge Road West/East
Lincoln M. Alexander Parkway - Mud Street, (Hamilton City Road 11)
Stone Church Road West/East
; Rymal Road West/East
Twenty Road
Roads that cross Burlington Street
  Note: Listing of streets from West to East.
Bay Street
MacNab Street
James Street
Hughson Street
John Street
Catharine Street
Ferguson Avenue
Wellington Street
Victoria Avenue
Wentworth Street
Sherman Avenue
Gage Avenue
Ottawa Street
Kenilworth Avenue
Parkdale Avenue
Other Municipality Freeways in Hamilton
Lincoln M. Alexander Parkway-The Linc
Red Hill Valley Parkway (under construction)
 Highway 6 By-Pass
Images
Image:GageNorthTracksHamilton.JPG|Railway Tracks, Gage Avenue North, near Burlington Street Image:GageNorthTruckLot.JPG|Truck Lot, Gage Avenue North, near Burlington Street Image:HamiltonNorthEndIndustrial.JPG|Stelco &amp; North End industrial buildings Image:HamiltonNorthEndIndustrialA.JPG|Dofasco &amp; North End industrial buildings
References
North End Neighbours
MapArt Golden Horseshoe Atlas - Page 647/648 - Grids E12, E13, E14, E15, E16, E17, E18, E19, E20
Google Maps: Burlington Street (Hybrid)
Category:Roads in Hamilton, Ontario
↩
↩
↩
