 Personent hodie is a Christmas carol originally published in the 1582 Finnish song book Piae Cantiones, a volume of 74 Medieval songs with Latin texts collected by Jaakko Suomalainen, a Swedish Lutheran cleric, and published by T.P. Rutha.1 The song book had its origins in the libraries of cathedral song schools, whose repertory had strong links with medieval Prague, where clerical students from Finland and Sweden had studied for generations.2 A melody found in a 1360 manuscript from the nearby Bavarian city of Moosburg in Germany is highly similar, and it is from this manuscript that the song is usually dated.34
Textual origins
The Latin text is probably a musical parody of an earlier 12th century song beginning &quot;intonent hodie voces ecclesie&quot;, written in honour of Saint Nicholas, the patron saint of Russia, sailors and children - to whom he traditionally brings gifts on his feast day, 6 December.5 Hugh Keyte and Andrew Parrott note that two of the verses have an unusual double repeat ('Submersum, -sum, -sum puerum'; 'Reddens vir-, vir-, vir- ginibus'). In 'intonent hodie', these were used to illustrate the three boys and three girls saved by St Nicholas from drowning and prostitution, respectively.6 The text was probably re-written for the Feast of the Holy Innocents (December 28) when choristers and their &quot;boy bishop&quot; traditionally displaced the senior clergy from the choir stalls.7 The carol is still often associated with Holy Innocents' Day.8
Songs from Piae Cantiones continued to be performed in Finland until the 19th Century.9 The book became well known in Britain after a rare copy of Piae Cantiones owned by Peter of Nyland was given as a gift to the British Minister in Stockholm. He subsequently gave it to John Mason Neale in 1852, and it was from this copy that Neale, in collaboration with Thomas Helmore published songs in two collections in 1853 and 1854 respectively.10
Translations
The most common English translation of the text is by &quot;James M. Joseph&quot;, a pseudonym of the composer Jane M. Joseph (1894-1929). She translates the title as On this day earth shall ring, although there are several other English translations.11 Other versions include Elizabeth Poston's 1965 &quot;Boys' Carol&quot;, which translates the first line of the text as &quot;Let the boys' cheerful noise/Sing today none but joys&quot; and John Mason Neale's &quot;Let The Song be Begun&quot;, which uses the melody but not the text of the carol.1213 Aidan Oliver's non-verse translation renders the text as &quot;Today let the voices of children resound in joyful praise of Him who is born for us.&quot;14
Arrangements
The carol became more prominent in England after being arranged for unison voices and orchestra in 1916 by Gustav Holst (1874-1934), where in its organ reduction it is often used as a processional hymn in church and cathedral services.151617 Holst's version often forms part of the Festival of Nine Lessons and Carols, and was last featured in the service from King's College Chapel, Cambridge in 1998 following the eighth lesson.18 This arrangement is sometimes referred to as &quot;Theodoric&quot; in reference to the composer's middle name (Theodore).19
In addition to Holst's version, there is a harmonised choral arrangement by Hugh Keyte and Andrew Parrott in the New Oxford Book of Carols, an arrangement by Antony Pitts in the Naxos Book of Carols and two arrangements by John Rutter; one for choir and full orchestra which emulates percussive medieval instrumentation, and another in his anthology Dancing Day for female or boys voices with harp or piano accompaniment.202122 The Retrover Ensemble's performance for Naxos Records pairs the piece with Gaudete, another carol from Piae Cantiones.23
There are also several recorded versions arranged in a more folk-oriented style, for example a performance by Maddy Prior and The Carnival Band on their 1987 album A Tapestry of Carols, which utilises period instruments.24 The female a cappella quartet Anonymous 4 have also recorded the song with its original &quot;Intonent hodie&quot; text on their CD Legends of St. Nicholas.25
Robert Cummings, writing in the Allmusic guide, states that the &quot;melody is glorious and ebullient in its lively, triumphant manner. It largely consists of bright, resolute three-note phrases whose overall structure gradually rises, then descends.&quot;26
Text
Latin text of &quot;Personent hodie&quot; (1582)
English translation by Jane M. Joseph (1894-1929)27
Latin text of &quot;Intonent hodie&quot; (c.1360)28
Personent hodie
voces puerulae,
laudantes iucunde
qui nobis est natus,
summo Deo datus,
et de virgineo ventre procreatus.
On this day earth shall ring
with the song children sing
to the Lord, Christ our King,
born on earth to save us;
him the Father gave us.
Refrain
Id-e-o-o-o, id-e-o-o-o,
Id-e-o gloria in excelsis Deo!
Intonent hodie
Voces ecclesiae,
Dies laetitiae
Refulsit in mundo,
Ergo laetabundo
Corde jubilemus
Et ore jucundo.
In mundo nascitur,
pannis involvitur
praesepi ponitur
stabulo brutorum,
rector supernorum.
perdidit spolia princeps infernorum.
His the doom, ours the mirth;
when he came down to earth,
Bethlehem saw his birth;
ox and ass beside him
from the cold would hide him.
Refrain
Sanctus hic inclitus,
Domino subditus,
In cunis positus
Ubera vitabat,
Corpus macerabat,
Et ter in sabbato
Puer jejunabat.
Magi tres venerunt,
parvulum inquirunt,
Bethlehem adeunt,
stellulam sequendo,
ipsum adorando,
aurum, thus, et myrrham ei offerendo.
God's bright star, o'er his head,
Wise Men three to him led;
kneel they low by his bed,
lay their gifts before him,
praise him and adore him.
Refrain
Parenti misero
Submerso puero
Mari pestifero
Dedit, quod petivit,
Preces exaudivit,
Submersum puerum
Patris custodivit.
Omnes clericuli,
pariter pueri,
cantent ut angeli:
advenisti mundo,
laudes tibi fundo.
ideo gloria in excelsis Deo.
On this day angels sing;
with their song earth shall ring,
praising Christ, heaven's King,
born on earth to save us;
peace and love he gave us.
Refrain
Tribus virginibus
Victu carentibus
Reddidit honorera,
Subtraxit errorem,
Reddens virginibus
Virgineum florem.
References
External links
Personent hodie arranged by Gustav Holst at the Choral Public Domain Library
it:Personent hodie sv:Personent Hodie
Category:Christmas carols Category:14th-century songs Category:16th-century songs Category:Compositions by Gustav Holst
&quot;On This Day Earth Shall Ring&quot; at hymnsandcarolsofchristmas.com, URL accessed January 4, 2009↩
Gustav Holst, &quot;Personet hodie&quot; in the Oxford Book of Carols (London: Oxford University Press, 1928), p.171.↩
Robert Cummings, &quot;Personent hodie&quot; at allmusic, URL accessed January 4, 2009↩
Ralph Vaughan Williams, Martin Shaw (ed.), note to J.M. Neale &quot;January Carol&quot; the Oxford Book of Carols (London: Oxford University Press, 1928), p.291.↩
Hugh Keyte, Andrew Parrott, &quot;Personent Hodie, On This Day Earth Shall Ring&quot; in The Musical Times, Vol. 133, No. 1795 (September 1992), pp. 1-4↩
The Boys' Carol at Golden Hind Music, URL accessed January 4, 2009↩
&quot;Personent hodie&quot; at hymnsandcarolsofchristmas.com, URL accessed January 4, 2009↩
Personent hodie arranged by Gustav Holst at the Choral Public Domain Library, URL accessed January 4, 2009↩
Nine Lessons and Carols 1998 order of service at the Choir of King's College, Cambridge website, URL accessed January 27, 2009↩
Erik Routley, An English-speaking Hymnal Guide, (London: Liturgical Press, 1979), p.140↩
Antony Pitts, The Naxos Book of Carols (Faber Music, 2003)↩
John Rutter, Dancing Day at singers.com, URL accessed January 4, 2009↩
Markus Tapio, Piae Cantiones: Latin Song in Medieval Finland. Naxos Records 8.554180↩
Brian Wilson, Review of A Tapestry of Carols at MusicWeb, URL accessed January 27, 2009↩
Anonymous 4, Legends of St. Nicholas. Harmonia Mundi HMU 907232↩
Guido Maria Dreves, Analecta Hymnica Medii Aevi Volume: 21, (Leipzig: O.R. Reisland, 1895)↩
