Church of St Mary the Virgin
Newport is a large village in Essex near Saffron Walden, in which Newport Free Grammar School is located. The village has a population of just over 2,000.
Located approximately 41 miles (51 kilometers) north of London the village is situated amongst the arable fields of northern Essex. With a regular train service to London Liverpool Street Station from the Newport (Essex) railway station the village is considered to be within commuting distance of the Capital and as such attracts a number of workers from London City.
Newport is the centre point of the long distance path &quot;The Harcamlow Way&quot;, a figure of eight walk between the towns of Cambridge and Harlow, consequently it has a large number of walks radiating from its centre; short walks of surrounding interest include those heading towards Saffron Walden, the English Heritage property of Audley End House or Prior Hall Barn in Widdington.
History
The earliest mention of Newport is in the Domesday Book. The name is thought to be of Anglo-Saxon origin and is thought to mean new town or market, rather than a modern day seaport. &lt;U+201C&gt;Port&lt;U+201D&gt; was often a name for a market in Saxon times, and Newport did have a flourishing market in this period.
The village prospered until around 1300 AD, after which it declined and its market ceased; it was overtaken in importance by the town and neighbour, Saffron Walden.
Until the 20th century Newport was mostly dependent upon agriculture in addition to local trade of leather, woolcombing and in later years, malting.
There are many attractive old buildings in the village, a characteristic of the area. The church, St Mary the Virgin, 1 dates from the late 14th century. Perhaps the two most interesting other buildings are The Crown House (mostly late 16th century), and Monks Barn, a Wealden type house dating from the 15th century.
Image:Newport Essex Monks Barn.JPG|Monks' Barn
In 1588 Newport Free Grammar School was founded by Dame Joyce Frankland; although it has retained its name it began to take boys of all abilities in 1976, and is now fully comprehensive as well as co-educational.
On the creation of a turnpike trust in 1744 the main road was greatly improved. This brought new people and new trade to the village, as did the arrival of the railway in 1845.
The greatest changes have occurred recently. 100 years ago about 900 people, largely agricultural workers, lived in some 220 dwellings. By 1971 the population had increased somewhat to over 1,200. Since then all the livestock farms have closed, fields, orchards and farm premises in the centre of the village have been built over, and more than 2,200 people now occupy over 900 houses.
Entertainment
The village has two public houses. The Coach and Horses, a large 17th century Inn situated at the north end of the village, which offers a wide range of food and beverages; and the White Horse, an equally old but smaller pub in the centre of the village, which serves as the vibrant hub of the village's social activities. There is also a private members club, The Newport Club, and an Indian restaurant, The Radhuni.
Newport is home to a tennis club and youth organisations2 and benefits from the Village Hall where activities include a farmers' market, bingo, keep fit, the Footlight Theatre Dance School, Newport Amateur Theatrical Society, Newport Art Group, and Saffron Walden Indoor Carpet Bowls Club.3
Newport is famed for its exceptional village magazine, Newport News; which is published twice a year and runs to around 150 pages. It is also noted for its themed bonfire night firework display on November 5th each year, which attracts an international audience.
Business opportunities
Newport Business Association, a not-for-profit community-led business networking group, has been set up to discuss and take positive local action on issues that concern the business community in and around Newport.4 Membership is open to all businesses in Newport and the surrounding areas.
Its purpose is simple: to help promote the vibrant business community within which promotional activities can be launched.
The association's aims are: &lt;U+2022&gt; Allow the business community within Newport to voice local community issues to organisations &lt;U+2022&gt; To create links with local authorities for consultation and information &lt;U+2022&gt; To understand best practices and enable companies to network and promote village businesses &lt;U+2022&gt; To gather ideas and initiatives that promote businesses with Newport and the local area.
Famous Inhabitants
The seventeenth century writer of books on cookery and household management, Hannah Woolley lived here as wife of the school master around 1646.
Chef Jamie Oliver went to Newport Free Grammar School and lives in a village nearby. His father owns a pub called The Cricketers in the nearby village of Clavering. The professional footballer Matt Holland attended the same school, as did Martin Caton MP.
External links
nl:Newport (Essex) pl:Newport (Essex)
Category:Uttlesford Category:Villages in Essex
↩
↩
↩
↩
