After the Hamdi v. Rumsfeld ruling on June 28th, 2004, U.S. Deputy of Defense Paul Wolfowitz issued an order establishing the Combatant Status Review Tribunals (CSRT).1 The purpose of the CSRT's is to determine if detainees held within U.S. Naval Base Guantanamo Bay, Cuba have been correctly designated as &quot;enemy combatants.&quot; These non-public hearings are conducted as &quot;a formal review of all the information related to a detainee to determine whether each person meets the criteria to be designated as an enemy combatant.&quot;2 The first CRST hearings began in July of 2004. CRST transcripts of the hearings can be found for &quot;high value detainees&quot; on the Department of Defense (DoD) website as PDF files and [REDACTED] mp3 format audio files. 3 As of October 30th, 2007, fourteen CSRT transcripts are available on the DoD website.
Existing U.S. and the Combat Status Review Tribunals
Secretary of the Navy Gordon England stated4: 
Thus, the tribunals themselves are modeled after the procedures&lt;U+2014&gt;AR 190-8 Tribunals&lt;U+2014&gt;the military uses to make determinations in compliance with the Article 5 of the Third Geneva Convention (that states &quot;Should any doubt arise as to whether persons, having committed a belligerent act and having fallen into the hands of the enemy, belong to any of the categories enumerated in Article 4, such persons shall enjoy the protection of the present Convention until such time as their status has been determined by a competent tribunal.&quot;)5 This is most likely because, in Hamdi v. Rumsfeld, a plurality of the Supreme Court suggested the Department of Defense empanel tribunals similar to the AR 190 to make factual status determinations. The mandate of the CSRTs and the AR 190-8 Tribunals differed in that AR 190-8 Tribunals were authorized to determine that captives were civilians, who should be released, and &quot;lawful combatants&quot;, who the Geneva Conventions protect from prosecution..6
Conduct of Combatant Status Review Tribunals
The exact location of the current CSRT hearings is unknown, but prior CSRT hearings were held in trailers in Guantanamo Bay, Cuba. Images of the trailers, with the white, plastic chairs the detainees sat in shackled to the floor and the large, black leather chair behind a microphone where the President sat can be found on the DoD website.7
The Presiding Officers
The identity of the presiding officers at CRSTs hearings is classified. In the PDF files of the CSRT transcripts released on the DoD website, that information has been removed from the transcripts. The ranks of those present, however, and their service branch do remain in the documents. So, for Guleed Hassan Ahmed's CRST in April of 2007, one finds that the CSRT President was a Lieutenant Colonel and U.S. Air Force Member. Other services present include the U.S. Marine Corps and the U.S. Army; the only other rank present, in this case, was Gunnery Sergeant.8 In other CSRTs, the ranks, services, and persons present appear to varry. At certain CSRTs when required, a non-military, language analyst was present.
Role of the CSRT Recorder
The CSRT Recorder had several tasks. First, he or she was charged with keeping a record of the CSRT process by recording the CSRT process. Second, the Recorder swore in all the CSRT participants by administering an oath. Third, the Recorder was also charged with presenting classified and unclassified material during the CRSTs. Fourth, the Recorder was often asked to explain or clarrify facts or information during the CRST. In Guleed Hassan Ahmed's CSRT transcript one finds the following exchange:
PRESIDENT:[The]Tribunal has completed its review of the unclassified evidence provided. We do have one question for the Recorder. Is Somalia, Ethiopia, and/or Kenya a coalition partner?
RECORDER: Somalia is not; Ethiopia is; and Kenya is, a coalition partner of the United States.9
Role of the Detainee at CSRTs
Detainees had the option of attending their CSRTs, but attendance was not mandated. Some detainees protested the CSRTs by not attending, opting instead to send personal, written statements to be read before the CSRT in their absence. The reading of a detainee's written statement was the task of The Personal Representative, and this occured, in one case, with Guleed Hassan Ahmed who did not attend his CSRT and instead sent a statement.10
When detainees did attend, if required, a linguist, language analyst, or translator was typically was present to assist the detainee and tribunal members. This was the case in Walid Bin Attash's CSRT, among others, during which a non-military, civilian translator was present.11
Presence of Observers at CSRTs
The question of the presence of outside, neutral observers at the CRSTs is debated.
Murat Kurnaz, an example
Murat Kurnaz was a young Turk who was born in, and had grown up, in Germany. When captured he was close to being granted German citizenship. He was taken off a tourist bus and arrested while on a trip to Pakistan -- not &quot;on the battlefield&quot;.
The tribunal's determination was that there was enough evidence of Kurnaz had ties to terrorism that he should be held as an enemy combatant.
Through a bureaucratic slip-up Kurnaz's file was declassifed. During the brief window when it was declassified the Washington Post was able to review all the evidence against him and publish a summary.12 Joyce Hens Green, a Washington jurist, had been able to review both the classified and unclassified evidence. Green found that Kurnaz's file contained something like 100 pages of documents and reports explaining that German and American investigators could find no evidence whatsoever that Kurnaz had any ties to terrorism. Shortly before his tribunal an unsigned memo had been added to his file concluded he was an al Qaeda member. Green's comment on the memo was that it: 
Eugene R. Fidell, a Washington-based expert in military law, said: 
Critics
It has been suggested these CSRT's are inherently flawed. The principal arguments of why they are inadequate to warrant acceptance as &quot;competent tribunal,&quot; are: 1314
a The CSRT conducted rudimentary proceedings
b The CSRT afforded detainees few basic protections
c Many detainees lacked counsel
d The CSRT also informed detainees only of general charges against them, while the details on which the CSRT premised enemy combatant status decisions were classified.
e Detainees had no right to present witnesses or to cross-examine government witnesses.
Some specific cases that call attention to the CSRT procedure: Mustafa Ait Idir, Moazzam Begg, Murat Kurnaz, Feroz Abbasi, and Martin Mubanga.  Carol D. LeonnigPanel Ignored Evidence on Detainee Washington Post March 27, 2005; Page A01
Carol D. Leonnig Judge Rules Detainee Tribunals Illegal Washington Post February 1, 2005; Page A01
Ian Herbert and Ben Russell 'The Americans are Breaking International Law... It is a Society Heading Towards Animal Farm' - Archbishop Sentamu on Guantanamo The Independent February 18, 2006 original 
A comment on the matter by legal experts states:
The fact that no status determination had taken place according to the Third Geneva Convention was sufficient reason for a judge from the District Court of Columbia dealing with a habeas petition, to stay proceedings before a military commission. Judge Robertson in Hamdan v. Rumsfeld held that the Third Geneva Convention, which he considered self-executing, had not been complied with since a Combatant Status Review Tribunal could not be considered a 'competent tribunal' pursuant to article 5 of the Third Geneva Convention.
James Crisfield, the legal advisor to the Tribunals, offered his legal opinion, that CSRT &quot;do not have the discretion to determine that a detainee should be classified as a prisoner of war -- only whether the detainee satisfies the definition of &quot;enemy combatant&quot;&quot;15 Determining whether a captive should be classified as a prisoner of war is the purpose of a &quot;competent tribunal.&quot;
Results
The CSRTs are presently on-going, but specific hearings have resulted in a variety of outcomes. Many detainees are still being detained, others have been released to return to their homeland, and still others have been classified and cleared for release but remain at Guantanamo Bay and in U.S. custody because their home countries cannot assure their safety.16
According the to prior Secretary of the Navy Gordon England, The basis of detaining captured enemy combatants is not to punish but, rather, to prevent them from continuing to fight against the United States and its coalition partners in the ongoing global war on terrorism. Detention of captured enemy combatants is both allowed and accepted under international law of armed conflict. 17
2007 Combatant Status Review Tribunals for 14 &quot;high-value detainees&quot;
In a surprise move President George W. Bush announced the transfer of 14 &quot;high-value detainees&quot; from clandestine CIA custody to military custody in Guantanamo in the fall of 2006.18 Prior to the transfer legal critics had repeatedly stated that the men in covert CIA custody could never be tried because they had been subjected to abusive interrogation techniques, which would invalidate any evidence that flowed from their interrogations.
Nevertheless, Bush said the transfer would allow the men, most of whom were considered to be members of the inner circle of al Qaeda's senior leadership, to be tried at Guantanamo Bay using the CSRT procedures.
U.S. Judicial Branch Appeals
Originally the Bush Presidency asserted that the captives had no right to appeal.19 Captives who had &quot;next friends&quot; willing to initiate the habeas corpus process filed appeals before the United States Judicial Branch. Rasul v. Bush was the first appeal to make its way to the Supreme Court of the United States. The creation of the Combatant Status Review Tribunals was a side effect of Rasul v. Bush.
Through the Detainee Treatment Act of 2005 and the Military Commissions Act of 2006 the United States Congress moved to first limit, and then completely curtail the captive's ability to file habeas corpus appeals.20
Captives who had outstanding habeas corpus appeals are expected to have the Supreme Court make a ruling in the consolidated cases Al Odah v. United States and Boumediene v. Bush over whether Congress had the authority strip them of the right to file habeas corpus appeals through the Military Commissions Act. The Supreme Court will hear the cases on December 5, 2007.
The Military Commission Act does provide a process where captives can appeal the Combatant Status Review Tribunal had properly followed OARDEC's own rules when it confirmed their enemy combatant status.21 If and when captives are able to file these appeals they would be heard before the U.S. Court of Appeals for the D.C. Circuit.
Emma Schwartz, in the US News and World Report, on August 30, 2007, reported that her sources told her: ''&quot;...Up to one fourth of the department's own civil appellate staff has recently opted out of handling the government's cases against detainee appeals.&quot;22
See also
Administrative Review Board
Guantanamo military commissions
Camp Delta
Camp Echo
Camp Iguana
Camp X-ray
Fourth Geneva Convention
Ex parte Quirin
Extraordinary rendition
Charles Swift
Irregulars
No longer enemy combatant
Third Geneva Convention
unlawful combatant
War on terror
Notes
External links
Q&amp;A: Guantanamo Hearings, BBC, August 6 2004
US Admits Translation Errors At Guantanamo Tribunals, Australian Broadcasting Corporation, August 27 2004
Top 10 Signs You Might Not Get a Fair Trial at Gitmo, NPR, September 14 2004
US court questions detainee handling, Australian Financial Review, September 9 2005
Guant&lt;U+00E1&gt;namo - an icon of lawlessness, Amnesty International
Fabricated Justice: Guantanamo Four Years Later, Human Rights Watch, January 24 2006
List of detainees who went through complete CSRT process, April 19, 2006
Combatant Status Review Tribunal Category:Anti-terrorism policy of the United States Category:George W. Bush administration controversies Category:Guantanamo Bay Naval Base Category:Guantanamo Bay captives legal and administrative procedures
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
Carol D. Leonnig Panel Ignored Evidence on Detainee in the Washington Post March 27 2005; Page A01↩
↩
↩
Moazzam Begg's dossier (.pdf) from his Combatant Status Review Tribunal, hosted by Associated Press↩
↩
↩
↩
