The '''St Teresa's High School at Charni Road ''' is a government, co-educational day school located at Charni Road in Mumbai, India. The institution was established in 1844. The school caters to pupils from kindergarten up to class 10 and the medium of instruction is English. The school is affiliated to the Archdiocesan Board of Education, Mumbai, which conducts the Maharashtra State Board of Secondary and Higher Secondary Education examinations at the close of class 10.
Campus site and layout
The school building is divided into three buildings.The school has three playgrounds.A Mud ground,stone mud ground and the quadrant. The main school building has three floors.On the ground floor the classrooms of Jr K.G,Sr K.G and Std. I,the assembly hall,the school church, the school office,computer lab,the A.V room and the Principal's office are located. The first floor has the classrooms of classes II,III and IV,the Std. X B classroom and the laboratories.The second floor has the classrooms of Standards VIII,IX and the classroom of Std. X A,the vice principals office,the school library and the school staff room.The third floor has the classrooms of Standards V, VI and VII.
Admissions and curriculum
Admissions
The admission notice for Junior kindergarten is put up in January. During the admission procedure, preference is given to Catholics and siblings of former students.
Curriculum
The school follows the Maharashtra State Board of Secondary and Higher Secondary Education syllabus.English is the medium of instruction. Hindi is taught as second languages. Marathi, the regional language is taught as a third language.
The academic year which commences in June and concludes in April consists of two terms. The first term is from June till November and the second term is from November till April. Tests are conducted periodically and examinations are held at the end of every term. The courses of studies extend from kindergarten to class 10, at the end of which students appear for the SSC Examinations. The school's students have consistently performed well at the SSC examinations and the school has maintained a 100% pass-rate.
Extracurricular activities
Emphasis is placed on extracurricular activities. Inter-house debates, elocution, dramatics and sporting competitions are also a part of the cultural lives of the older students. The school also takes part in Science Exhibitions and quizzes conducted.
House system
The objective of the house system is to foster a sense of collective responsibility and solidarity amongst students. The house system also serves as the centre of school life, with students from different houses often competing at sports and other co-curricular activities.
There are four school houses, viz. &lt;U+2013&gt;  Nehru  Gandhi  Tilak  Tagore.
Culture
St. Teresa's is a cosmopolitan school. The school imparts Christian values to the children. The Christmas Concert is celebrated every December. A sports meet and a farewell party for students who are passing out of the institution are also held annually. The school stands for academic excellence,devrlopment of skills and character formation based on love of God and service of man as modelled on the person of Jesus Christ.
References
https://www.facebook.com/pages/St-Teresas-high-School/229100727135197
http://eduraft.com/school/Mumbai/Charni+Road/St+Theresa+School/20028/about_the_school
http://www.thinkvidya.com/st-teresa-high-school-mumbai/12226
Category:Schools in Mumbai
