Instrumentation in petrochemical industries are basically flowmeters, pressure transmitters, level meters, temperature instruments, and analysis instruments, etc.
Temperature Indicator
The measurement of temperature is a vital part of instrumentation in petrochemical industries. Platinum Resistance Temperature Detectors (RTD's) are often used for their excellent temperature response. Thermocouples are used in locations that need a more durable sensor. Thermocouples come in many types.
Pressure Measurement
We use a Pressure to Current converter (P/I converter)1 in the petrochemical industries to measure and show the amount of pressure developed by the Liquified Petroleum Gas (LPG), crude oil, petrol, and various other petroleum byproducts. In the P/I converter, the indicated pressure can be a digital or an analog form. The main advantage is that it can be directly shown in the control panel in the control room. This is also the same for temperature measurement.
Flowmeter
The measurement of petrol is conducted in an oil refinery at the time when the refined liquid leaves the refinery. Because the refined oil is a volatile liquid, it is important to know how much oil is being transported at each measurement site along the pipeline. This requirement also holds for natural gas. Flowmeters generally consist of the vortex, Positive Displacement (PD),2 Differential Pressure (DP),3 Coriolis, and ultrasonic4 varieties.
Level Meters
The petroleum, natural gas, and petrochemical industries place high requirements on level measurement. Besides instruments of traditional technologies like differential pressure level meters, there are also level meters of radar, magnetostrictive, and magnetic float, etc. applied extensively.
The petroleum and gas industry is an important segment where level meters witness high growth over recent years. As India improves the industrial technologies of extracting and transporting oil, some new high-end level meters will have a wide application in this segment.
One of the problems with a significant number of technologies is that they are installed through a nozzle and are exposed to products. This can create several problems, especially when retrofitting new equipment to vessels that have already been stress relieved, as it may not be possible to fit the instrument at the location required. Also, as the measuring element is exposed to the contents within the vessel, it may either attacked or coat the instrument causing it to fail in service. One of the most reliable methods for measuring level is using a Nuclear gauge, as it is installed outside the vessel and doesn't normally require a nozzle for bulk level measurement. The measuring element is installed outside the process and can be maintained in normal operation without taking a shutdown. Shutdown is only required for an accurate calibration.5
Analysis Instruments
&lt;U+3000&gt;&lt;U+3000&gt;Industrial chromatographs are generally used in the olefin processing in the petrochemical industry. Every year, usually hundreds of sets are needed in China. However, influenced by the project cycle, demand fluctuates greatly. Despite a small number of those being applied, the industrial chromatographs cover a large proportion in the sales volume of analysis instruments because of their high prices. Furthermore, continuous gas analyzers are also widely applied to the petrochemical industry.
&lt;U+3000&gt;&lt;U+3000&gt;The petroleum and gas industry is also an important sector for the growing analysis instruments over the past few years. With the improvement of industrial technologies in oil extraction and transportation in China, some analysis instruments serving to improve the product quality and industrial security are being applied increasingly.
See also
Petrochemical
Petroleum
Petroleum products
Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries
References
Category:Petroleum products Category:Chemical engineering Category:Applied and interdisciplinary physics
P/I Pressure to Current Converter / Transducer↩
Positive Displacement (PD) Flowmeters↩
Flow &amp; Level Measurement - Differential Pressure Flowmeters↩
↩
↩
