Father Jacques Marquette S.J. (June 1, 1637 &lt;U+2013&gt; May 18, 1675),1 sometimes known as P&lt;U+00E8&gt;re Marquette or James Marquette,2 was a French Jesuit missionary who founded Michigan's first European settlement, Sault Ste. Marie, and later founded St. Ignace, Michigan. In 1673 Father Marquette and Louis Jolliet were the first Europeans to explore and map the northern portion of the Mississippi River.
Biography
Jacques Marquette was born in Laon, France, on June 1, 1637 and joined the Society of Jesus at age 17. After he worked and taught in France for several years, the Jesuits assigned him to New France in 1666 as a missionary to the Indigenous peoples of the Americas. He showed great proficiency in learning the local languages, especially Huron. In 1668 Father Marquette (French: P&lt;U+00E8&gt;re Marquette) was moved by his superiors to missions farther up the St. Lawrence River in the western Great Lakes region. He helped found missions at Sault Ste. Marie in present-day Michigan and at La Pointe, on Lake Superior near the present-day city of Ashland, Wisconsin. At La Pointe he encountered members of the Illinois tribes, who told him about the important trading route of the Mississippi River. They invited him to teach their people, whose settlements were mostly further south. Because of wars between the Hurons at La Pointe and the neighboring Lakota people, Father Marquette left the mission and went to the Straits of Mackinac; he informed his superiors about the rumored river and requested permission to explore it.
 Leave was granted, and in 1673, Marquette joined the expedition of Louis Jolliet, a French-Canadian explorer. They departed from St. Ignace on May 17, with two canoes and five voyageurs of French-Indian ancestry (now recognized as the ethnic group M&lt;U+00E9&gt;tis). They followed Lake Michigan to Green Bay and up the Fox River, nearly to its headwaters. From there, they were told to portage their canoes a distance of slightly less than two miles through marsh and oak plains to the Wisconsin River. Many years later, at that point the town of Portage, Wisconsin was built, named for the ancient path between the two rivers. From the portage, they ventured forth, and on June 17, they entered the Mississippi near present-day Prairie du Chien, Wisconsin.
The Joliet-Marquette expedition traveled to within  of the Gulf of Mexico but turned back at the mouth of the Arkansas River. By this point they had encountered several natives carrying European trinkets, and they feared an encounter with explorers or colonists from Spain.3 They followed the Mississippi back to the mouth of the Illinois River, which they learned from local natives provided a shorter route back to the Great Lakes. They reached Lake Michigan near the site of modern-day Chicago, by way of the Chicago Portage. In September Marquette stopped at the mission of St. Francis Xavier, located in present-day Green Bay, Wisconsin, while Jolliet returned to Quebec to relate the news of their discoveries.
 Marquette and his party returned to the Illinois Territory in late 1674, becoming the first Europeans to winter in what would become the city of Chicago. As welcomed guests of the Illinois Confederation, the explorers were feasted en route and fed ceremonial foods such as sagamite.4
In the spring of 1675, Marquette traveled westward and celebrated a public mass at the Grand Village of the Illinois near Starved Rock. A bout of dysentery which he had contracted during the Mississippi expedition sapped his health. On the return trip to St. Ignace, he died at age 37 near the modern town of Ludington, Michigan.
A Michigan Historical Marker at this location reads: 
 The Ojibway Museum on State Street in downtown St. Ignace is in a building that was constructed adjacent to Marquette's gravesite during urban development.
Legacy and honors
Father Marquette is memorialized in the names of many towns, geographical locations, parks, a major university, and other institutions:
The Pere Marquette Railway was named after him.
Marquette University in Milwaukee, Wisconsin
Marquette County, Michigan,5 Marquette County, Wisconsin
The towns of Marquette, Michigan, Marquette, Wisconsin, Marquette, Iowa, Marquette, Illinois, Marquette Heights, Illinois and others
Pere Marquette Charter Township, Michigan
Marquette Island in Lake Huron
Pere Marquette State Park near Grafton, Illinois
Father Marquette National Memorial near St. Ignace, Michigan6
Pere Marquette Beach, a public beach, Muskegon, Michigan
Pere Marquette State Forest, in the State of Michigan
The Pere Marquette River in the Michigan
Place Jacques Marquette, Laon, France (his birthplace)
&quot;Cit&lt;U+00E9&gt; Marquette&quot;, former US-City-Base (1956-1966) built by Americans based on the NATO Air Force Base in Couvron (38th Bombardment Wing), Laon, France (his birthplace).
In addition, statues in Marquette's honor have been erected in several places, including the Prairie du Chien Post Office, Parliament Building, Quebec, Canada; at Marquette University; Detroit, Michigan; and Fort Mackinac, Michigan. Other types of memorials were erected, including those at his birthplace in Laon, France; and St. Mary's Church, Utica, Illinois.
The Legler Branch of the Chicago Public Library displays &lt;U+201C&gt;Wilderness, Winter River Scene,&lt;U+201D&gt; a restored mural by Midwestern artist R. Fayerweather Babcock. The mural depicts Father Jacques Marquette and Native Americans trading by a river. Commissioned for Legler Branch in 1934, the mural was funded by the Works Projects Administration. 7
Photo gallery
Image:Marquette.jpg|Sketch of Father Marquette Image:Marquette and jolliet map 1681.jpg|Ca. 1681 map of Marquette and Jolliet's 1673 expedition Image:Marquette's Death - Michigan Historical Marker.jpg|Michigan Historical Marker: &quot;Marquette's Death&quot; Image:Jacques Marquette Memorial in Laon France 2007-12-01.JPG|Memorial to Marquette in his birthplace of Laon, France Image:Jacques Marquette.jpg|Alfred Lalibert&lt;U+00E9&gt;'s Marquette sculpture at Parliament Building (Quebec) Image:Marquette NSHC.jpg|Statue of Marquette in the National Statuary Hall Collection in the United States Capitol Image:JMMarquette.jpg|Statue of Marquette in Detroit, Michigan Image:Pere Marquette Mackinac 2007.jpg|Statue of Marquette at Fort Mackinac File:PereMarquetteMarquetteMI.jpg|Statue of Marquette in Marquette, Michigan Image:FrMarquetteStatue.jpg|Statue of Marquette in Prairie du Chien, Wisconsin
Notes
See also
Jacques Marquette (sculpture), a 2005 public art work by artist Ronald Knepper
Pere Jacques Marquette (Queoff), a 1987 public art work by Tom Queoff
Sagamite
Marquette (disambiguation) for other places, buildings and geographic objects named after Father Jacques Marquette.
Chicago Portage
Chicago Portage National Historic Site
External links
Biography at the Dictionary of Canadian Biography Online
The Jesuit Relations and Allied Documents 1610 to 1791, including Marquette's journal (Chapters CXXXVI - CXXXVIII)
Thwaites, Reuben G. Father Marquette New York: D. Appleton &amp; Company, 1902.
Category:1637 births Category:1675 deaths Category:People from Laon Category:People of Colonial French Louisiana Category:People of New France Category:Explorers of Canada Category:Explorers of North America Category:French explorers Category:17th-century French Jesuits Category:Marquette University people Category:Persons of National Historic Significance (Canada) Category:Burials in Michigan Category:Explorers of the United States
Jacques Marquette - Britannica Online Encyclopedia↩
Catholic Encyclopedia (1913): Archdiocese of Chicago, Retrieved February 23, 2012↩
Catton, Bruce (1984). Michigan: A History, p. 14. W. W. Norton &amp; Company. ISBN 0-393-30175-3↩
Wisconsin Historical Society↩
↩
Marquette, Jacques 1637 &lt;U+2013&gt; 1675↩
Chicago Public Library. Legler Branch.↩
