 , in terms of active hunting of these large mammals, is estimated by the Japan Whaling Association to have begun around the 12th century.1 However, Japanese whaling on an industrial scale began around the 1890s when Japan began to participate in the modern whaling industry, at that time an industry in which many countries participated.2 Japanese whaling activities have historically extended far outside Japanese territorial waters.
During the 20th century, Japan was heavily involved in commercial whaling. This continued until the International Whaling Commission (IWC) moratorium on commercial whaling went into effect in 1986. Japan continued to hunt whales using the scientific research provision in the agreement, and Japanese whaling is currently conducted by the Institute of Cetacean Research. This is allowed under IWC rules, although most IWC members oppose it.3 The whale meat from these scientific whale hunts is sold in shops and restaurants.4 The International Court of Justice has ruled that the Japanese whaling program in the Southern Ocean begun in 2005, JARPA II, was not for scientific purposes and has ordered that Japanese whaling under JARPA II cease.5
These hunts are a source of conflict between pro- and anti-whaling countries and organizations. Nations, scientists and environmental organizations opposed to whaling consider the Japanese research program to be unnecessary, and that it is a thinly disguised commercial whaling operation.6789
Japan maintains that annual whaling is sustainable and necessary for scientific study and management of whale stocks. Japan also argues that objections to whaling are based upon cultural differences and emotional anthropomorphism.1011
History
Archeological evidence in the form of whale remains discovered in burial mounds suggests that whales have been consumed in Japan since the J&lt;U+014D&gt;mon period (12,000 BC). Without the means to engage in active whaling, consumption at that time primarily stemmed from stranded whales.12 Surviving Ainu folklore reveals a long history of whaling13 and a spiritual association with whales.14 The earliest records of hand thrown harpoons date back to the 12th century.15
Inshore whaling in Taiji, Japan
Organized whaling
Organized open-boat shore whaling began in the 1570s; and continued into the early 20th century.16 Techniques were developed in the 17th century in Taiji, Wakayama. Wada Chubei Yorimoto established a fishery by organizing the group hunting system in 1606. Whalers would spot whales from stations along the shore and launch boats to catch them with harpoons and lances. His grandson, Wada Kakuemon Yoriharu, later known as Taiji Kakuemon Yoriharu, invented the whaling net technique called Amitori-shiki (&lt;U+7DB2&gt;&lt;U+53D6&gt;&lt;U+308A&gt;&lt;U+5F0F&gt;).171819
Right whales, humpback whales, gray, and fin whales were primarily hunted.20 Blue whales, sei, Bryde's and sperm whales were however also taken when possible.
Once ashore, the whale was quickly flensed and divided into its separate parts for various warehouses and further processing. Although the primary use for whales was meat, the entire whale was utilized in a variety of products including lamp oil, soaps, fertilizer, folding fans (baleen), and more. This method of whaling required a significant financial investment from rich individuals to compensate for the sizable labor force. However, whaling remained entwined with ritual and unlike their contemporary European counterparts the early Japanese coastal whalers considered whales a valuable resource and did not over-exploit local stocks.21
Modernization
Norwegian-style modern whaling, based on the use of power-driven vessels, cannons and exploding harpoons, was introduced in the Meiji era largely through the efforts of J&lt;U+016B&gt;r&lt;U+014D&gt; Oka who is considered the &quot;father of modern Japanese whaling&quot;.222324 Oka traveled the world gathering information about whaling practices including to Norway for harpoons, cannons and expertise. He also established the first modern whaling company in Japan in 1899, Nihon Enyo Gyogyo K.K. which took its first whale on February 4, 1900 with a Norwegian gunner, Morten Pedersen.2526
In the early 20th century, Juro Oka dominated the whale meat market in Japan with assistance and instruction from Norwegian whalers and their leased or purchased ships. Another boost was provided by the capture of a Russian whaling fleet and subsequent transfer to Toyo GyoGyo Co. Ltd.27 As Japan's whaling industry expanded into new territory, including Korean waters, ship production and oil processing, Oka's company (renamed Toyo Hogei K.K.) returned significant profits to its investors which led to increased Japanese competition. Oka later became the first president of the Japan Whaling and Fishing Association, established in 1908.2829
However, at the start of the 20th century local traditions conflicted with modern whaling practices. In 1911 the conflict turned violent in Same Village, Aomori Prefecture. Ocean pollution from the whaling stations, including large quantities of oil and blood runoff, angered the local fishermen and threatened their own fishing grounds. In protest the fishermen burned a Toyo Hogei facility down. The people of the Same region also did not consume whales and considered them sacred.30
The League of Nations raised concerns about the over-exploitation of whale stocks and called for conservation measures in 1925. This eventually led to the Geneva Convention for the Regulation of Whaling which was presented in 1931 but did not enter into force until 1934 and was completely ignored by Japan and Germany.313233
Antarctica
Factory ships were not used by Japan until the 1930s. As whale catches diminished in coastal waters, Japan looked to Antarctica. Toyo Hogei K.K. purchased the Norwegian factory ship, Antarctic, renaming it the Tonan Maru in 1934. Refrigerator ships were sent along to freeze and transport the meat back to Japan. By capitalizing on both the meat and oil of whales, the Japanese industry continued to out-compete other whaling nations. Improvements in technology such as the world's first diesel-powered whale catcher, the Seki Maru, also increased the capacity to take whales. In the years building up to World War II, the Germans purchased whale oil from Japan and both nations used it in preparation for war.34
In 1937 London, the International Conference on Whaling, which Japan did not attend, led to additional limits on pelagic whaling in order to prevent excessive exploitation (and specifically the extinction of the blue whale) creating the International Agreement for the Regulation of Whaling. Regarding voluntary acceptance of restrictions:
Regardless of efforts to establish limits, in part due to Japan ignoring an 89 day season limit and continuing for 125 days, a record 45,010 whales were taken in a single season. The Protocol to the International Agreement for the Regulation of Whaling, signed in 1938, established additional restrictions on whaling.35 Despite the attendance of Japanese representatives, Japan did not sign the agreement and started hunting for humpback and undersized whales five weeks prior to the defined start of the season.36 By 1939 Germany and Japan accounted for 30% of the world's whale take.37
World War II
The Tonan Maru No. 2 whaling factory ship, drafted into military use, was damaged by a Dutch submarine while taking part in the landing at Kuching, Borneo.
During the second world war Japan's whaling was significantly limited to more familiar hunting grounds, such as the Bonin Islands, to provide meat and oil for domestic and military use. Whaling there was halted in March, 1945 when the islands were taken by US forces. By November 1945 the whaling stations received permission to reopen; however, most whaling ships had been commandeered by the Japanese navy, and by the end of the war the factory ships and most of the whale catchers had been sunk.3839
General Douglas MacArthur encouraged the surrendered Japan to continue whaling in order to provide a cheap source of meat to starving people (and millions of dollars in oil for the USA and Europe).4041 The Japanese whaling industry quickly recovered as MacArthur authorized two tankers to be converted into factory ships, the Hashidate Maru and the Nisshin Maru. Whale catchers once again took blue whales, fins, humpbacks and sperm whales in the Antarctic and elsewhere.42
The first post-war expedition was overseen by a US naval officer, Lieutenant David McCracken, and observed by Australian Kenneth Coonan. Coonan expressed disapproval of McCracken in his reports of violated regulations and waste dumped over the side when the fleet began killing whales faster than they could be processed. McCracken even briefly joined in whaling with the Japanese crew of a whale catcher and detailed the trip in his 1948 book, Four Months on a Jap Whaler.43
The post-war recovery established whale meat as a nation-wide food source for the first time. In 1947 whale meat made up over 50 percent of the meat consumed in Japan. The market significantly increased through commercial sale and public distribution. In 1954, the School Lunch Act also included whale meat in compulsory education (elementary and middle school) to improve the nutrition of Japanese children.
ICRW and IWC
Signing the International Convention for the Regulation of Whaling, Washington, D.C. Dec 2, 1946
The International Convention for the Regulation of Whaling was created in 1946 in Washington to &quot;provide for the proper conservation of whale stocks and thus make possible the orderly development of the whaling industry&quot;.44 Based on the previous 1937 International Agreement and subsequent Protocols to that agreement in 1938 and 1945, the ICRW led to the 1949 creation of the International Whaling Commission and consists of guidelines for the international regulation of coastal and pelagic whaling. Japan joined the IWC in 1951.45
Japan would later make heavy use of one particular article of the ICRW despite the condemnation of environmental organizations and anti-whaling nations.
Pirate whaling
As the IWC enacted regulation regarding whaling a number of unregulated operations acting outside of the laws of member nations became notorious in the mid-late 20th century. For example, a large private whaling fleet was owned (through a variety of holding companies and flags of convenience) by shipping magnate Aristotle Onassis and gained notoriety for ignoring all limits of size and species. When the Peruvian navy finally stopped and seized the Onassis fleet, and just as sanctions were to be applied, the entire fleet was sold to Japan for $8.5 million. Onassis' factory ship, the Olympic Challenger, was renamed the Kyokuyo Maru II.4647
The Japanese trawler, Shunyo-maru, later became a combined catcher/factory whaling ship, MV Tonna, and was owned by Andrew M. Behr who also owned the infamous pirate whaling ship, Sierra. The Tonna is famous for its demise. In 1978 with full holds the Tonna landed another 50 ton fin whale. As the whale was being winched aboard for processing the ship listed over, took on water and quickly sank.4849 Behr and the Sierra were also linked to Japan's Taiyo Fisheries Co. through a Canadian subsidiary (Taiyo Canada Ltd.) and with whale product for Japanese markets. In July, 1979, the Sierra was severely damaged after being rammed by activist Paul Watson aboard his ship, the Sea Shepherd.50 The Sierra was later (February, 1980) sunk in port by unknown saboteurs with limpet mines.51 Taiyo and other Japanese fisheries have also been linked to pirate whaling through subsidiary companies in Taiwan, the Philippines, Spain, South Korea, Chile and Peru.454&quot;/&gt;123&quot;/&gt;
Consolidation
As quotas and resources were reduced and restrictions increased, the commercial viability of large competing whaling fleets was also diminished. In order to preserve the industry, six Japanese whaling companies negotiated an agreement through the Japan Fisheries Agency in July 1975. The six companies (Nihon Suisan, Taiyo Gyogyo, Kyokuyo, Nitto Hogei, Nihon Hogei and Hokuyo Hogei) merged to create a new company, Nihon Kyodo Hogei Co., Ltd. on February 15, 1976. Former president of the Japan Fisheries Association and former Director-General of the Japan Fisheries Agency, Iwao Fujita, became the first Managing Director by appointment.52
In April, 1976, Shintaro Abe, the Minister of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries, declared government support for the newly formed company.
Nihon Kyodo Hogei Co. Ltd was later renamed Kyodo Senpaku Co. Ltd and merged with the Japan Whaling Association and Institute of Cetacean Research to create the modern Institute of Cetacean Research in 1987.53
Moratorium
In 1972, the United Nations Environmental Conference produced a 52&lt;U+2013&gt;0 vote in favor of a 10 year global moratorium on commercial whaling. However, the UN resolution was not adopted by the IWC by a vote of 6-no, 4-yes and 4-abstain. Japan, Russia, Iceland, Norway, South Africa and Panama voted no.54
In 1973, a moratorium was once again proposed and voted down in the IWC lacking the required 3/4 majority (8-yes, 5-no, 1-abstain). Japan, Russia, Iceland, Norway and South Africa voted no.32&quot;/&gt; Between 1973 and 1982 the IWC would see its membership increase from 14 nations to 37, perhaps stacking the vote in favor of anti-whaling nations. In 1980 and 1981 two more votes failed to establish a moratorium by a 3/4 majority (13&lt;U+2013&gt;9&lt;U+2013&gt;2 and 16&lt;U+2013&gt;8&lt;U+2013&gt;3).55
In 1982, the IWC finally voted in favor of a moratorium on commercial whaling to go into force in 1986 (25&lt;U+2013&gt;7&lt;U+2013&gt;5). Japan objected to the moratorium and continued whaling (Under the ICRW an objecting nation is exempted from the disputed regulations. Japan also continued to hunt sperm whales despite a 1981 IWC zero catch quota.). The United States would play a significant role in Japan's acceptance of a global moratorium on commercial whaling due to its domestic laws. In particular the 1971 Pelly Amendment to the US Fishermen's Protection Act gives the US President legal authority to prohibit importation of fish products from any nation that is diminishing the effectiveness of fisheries conservation programs. It was later strengthened by the 1979 Packwood-Magnuson Amendment to the Fishery Conservation and Management Act giving the same sanctioning power with regard to the ICRW.32&quot;/&gt;5657
Potential US sanctions jeopardized access for Japanese fisheries to Alaskan waters, with an annual catch of a million tonnes of fish (), worth an estimated $425 million per year. A negotiated settlement was reached, allowing Japan to continue commercial whaling without the threat of US sanctions until 1988, with an agreement to drop Japan's objection to the moratorium in 1985. However, conservation groups sued the United States Secretary of Commerce, claiming that the law did not allow any deals. That claim was defeated by a US Supreme Court decision in 1986, and, as agreed, Japan withdrew its objection to the moratorium and ceased commercial whaling by 1988. Japan's access to Alaskan waters was later phased out anyway, due in part to pressure from US fishermen and conservationists, and also in response to Japan's subsequent use of research whaling.585960
Research whaling
In 1976, the quota for Southern Hemisphere Bryde's whales was set to zero by the IWC. However, Japan proceeded to take 225 of them during the 76&lt;U+2013&gt;77 season by issuing itself a permit to take whales for scientific research under Article VIII of the ICRW. Following this event, the IWC recommended all future applications of Article VIII be reviewed by the IWC scientific committee.61
In 1986, Japan introduced a similar proposal and later issued itself a scientific permit to take 825 minke whales and 50 sperm whales every year for ten years. Despite the fact that the IWC scientific committee rejected its research proposals, Japan continued whaling.
The IWC adopted a resolution in 1987 recommending Japan not proceed until disagreements over its research proposals were resolved. A second resolution was also adopted on February 14, 1988 recommending Japan not proceed. On February 9, 1988 Japanese whalers killed the first minke whale in Antarctic waters under the new self issued research whaling permit. U.S. President Ronald Reagan responded by cutting off Japanese fishing privileges in U.S. waters on April 6, 1988 under the Packwood-Magnuson Amendment.6263
Japan has since conducted research whaling programs in the North Pacific (JARPN 1994&lt;U+2013&gt;1999, JARPN II 2000 &lt;U+2013&gt; present) and in Antarctica (JARPA 1988&lt;U+2013&gt;2005, JARPA II 2005 &lt;U+2013&gt; present). The IWC has asked its members that conduct research whaling programs to demonstrate that the research provides critical information, that the research is needed for whale management purposes, and that non-lethal research techniques are not able to provide the same information. The IWC has issued at least 19 resolutions criticizing Japan for failing to meet these conditions and asking it to stop issuing permits.64
The current JARPA II permit has been &quot;for 850&lt;U+00B1&gt;10% Antarctic minke whales, 50 fin whales and 50 humpback whales annually. To date, Japan has refrained from taking humpback whales.&quot;65
Normalization
In 1994, at its 46th annual meeting, the IWC established the Southern Ocean Whale Sanctuary in a 23&lt;U+2013&gt;1&lt;U+2013&gt;8 vote. Commercial whaling is prohibited within the sanctuary boundaries. Only Japan voted in opposition.6667
As the size of the IWC continued to grow, so did the influence of Japan within the commission. For example, many new Caribbean member nations voted in favor of whaling interests in 2000 including the defeat of a proposed South Pacific Whale Sanctuary. Additional support for whaling was gained in the Pacific, Africa and South-East Asia. As many of these nations received economic aid from Japan, accusations of vote buying were made by anti-whaling groups. In 2001, Japanese fisheries official Masayuki Komatsu stated Japan used overseas development aid as a tool to gain influence.68697071
In 2006, the pro-whaling bloc won a symbolic victory in a non-binding resolution implying the moratorium on commercial whaling was both temporary and unnecessary (33&lt;U+2013&gt;32&lt;U+2013&gt;1).72
Japan followed with a proposal to 'normalize' the IWC. In the proposal, Japan's representatives claimed the IWC had become dysfunctional in favor of the total elimination of whaling. It also suggested reforms such as the use of secret ballots and increased recognition of cultural differences in the IWC. A Conference for the Normalization of the International Whaling Commission was hosted by Japan in 2007.737475
After over 50 years of control, Japan's center-right conservative party, Liberal Democratic Party (LDP), lost in 2009 elections to the opposing left, Democratic Party of Japan (DPJ). Environmental organizations had hoped the change in government would bring about an end to Japanese whaling. However, in 2009 the Foreign Minister of Japan, Katsuya Okada, explained that whaling would continue to receive support as a matter of policy.7677
A 2010 undercover investigation by reporters from the UK's Sunday Times revealed the officials of many developing countries accepted financial compensation from Japan for support in the IWC. Separate from millions in overseas development aid, membership fees, paid flights, hotel stays and spending money was all provided, by Japan, to gain the support of IWC delegates. In some cases cash was presented in envelopes by Japanese officials.78 Despite recordings from the investigation, officials implicated in the report have denied accepting bribes in exchange for votes.79
Japan ended its 2010&lt;U+2013&gt;2011 Antarctic hunt early, citing harassment by conservationists.80 However, it was later announced in October, 2011 that the 2011&lt;U+2013&gt;2012 whale hunt would go on as planned. An Associated Press poll of the Japanese public conducted in July and August 2011 found that 52% of Japanese supported whale hunting, 35% were neutral, and 13% were opposed.81
In 2011, at the 63rd meeting of the IWC, Japan demonstrated the progress of its 'normalization' policy. When South American countries proposed a vote to establish a new whale sanctuary in the South Atlantic Ocean, Japanese delegates led Iceland, several Caribbean countries, and additional representatives in a walkout. As a result, the vote was postponed for one year along with other matters pending consideration by the commission.82
Production
Japanese whaling is conducted in both pelagic (open-ocean) areas in the North Pacific Ocean and the Southern Ocean near Antarctica. Coastal waters are also utilized for small-type coastal whaling of dolphins and other small cetaceans. Large and small whales are sometimes taken as bycatch in the nets of Japanese fishing vessels as well.
Pelagic whaling
  Japan's pelagic whaling fleet, which annually hunts large whales in the Southern Ocean, consists of a number of ships for hunting and processing whale catch as well as securing the hunt against protests. During the 2009&lt;U+2013&gt;10 season, the Japanese fleet included a factory ship, four whale catchers and two security patrol vessels. The Japanese self-imposed quota includes 935 minke, 50 fin and 50 humpback whales per season.83
When whales are spotted the whale catchers will engage in pursuit. A harpoon cannon with a grenade tipped harpoon is fired at the target whale. A rope is trailed from the harpoon in order to prevent the whale from being lost. If the whale is struck and not killed instantly by the explosive tipped harpoon, a second harpoon may be used or the whale may be shot with a rifle until dead. A past method of using a second harpoon to electrocute whales is now forbidden by the IWC. Environmental groups have reported whales being dragged backward and drowned.84
Each caught whale is secured to the side of a whale catcher with rope. Lines are later used to transfer the whales from the whale catcher to the factory ship. Whales are next winched onto the factory ship through a slipway at the stern of the vessel. On the flensing deck several workers use specialized tools to butcher the whale. Usable product is delivered to the lower decks of the ship for further processing and refrigerated storage. Non usable product is dumped back into the ocean.
Additional regulations from the United Nations International Maritime Organization took effect on August 1, 2011 prohibiting ships using heavy oil from navigation in the Antarctic Treaty System area to prevent pollution. The IMO Guidelines For Ships Operating In Ice-Covered Waters also establishes requirements for a double-hull strengthened against ice-related damage. The Japanese factory ship Nisshin Maru does not currently meet these IMO standards.858687
Small type coastal whaling
Coastal fishing fleets that hunt dolphins use many small boats in a coordinated effort. The fishermen bang metal poles in the water in order to frighten and therefore guide noise-sensitive dolphins toward the shore. A series of nets are then used to corral the dolphins in. Divers and fishermen in boats next lance or cut the throats of the dolphins and haul them away to a nearby shore station for processing. A few dolphins are selected for sale to aquariums and spared for the marine park entertainment industry.
The practice of dolphin drive hunting in Taiji, Japan was recently the subject of a documentary film entitled The Cove. 88
Japanese whalers have hunted Baird's beaked whales on the Boso Peninsula, Wada, since the 17th century. Once landed just off the coast of Japan, the beaked whales are pulled onto a landing station with ropes and then butchered for sale. The meat is sold as food and the rest is used for fertilizer.
In May 2007 the IWC rejected a proposal to expand coastal catches. The quota was limited to a total of 66 whales between four whaling towns. The whalers of Wada encourage local children to attend the first butchering of each season followed by a community event where whale meat is served.89
According to the Japan Fisheries Agency up to 20,000 dolphins of several species will be taken, in many locations along the coast of Japan, over the course of a six-month season.90 Coastal whaling communities suffered significant damage as a result of the earthquake and tsunami disaster in March, 2011.91
Bycatch
In 2009, published DNA analysis of whale meat from Japanese markets suggested as many as 150 large whales from vulnerable coastal stocks were taken annually as bycatch. Japan legally allows the commercial sale of whales caught incidentally, entangled in fishing nets designed to catch coastal fish. Market surveys also detected migratory whales such as the endangered Humpback9293 and endangered Gray whales,9495 as well as the threatened Finback whale,9697 and the non-endangered Bryde's whales.98
The impact on J-stock whales, which have protected status under the IWC, seemingly increased with changes in Japanese regulations that legalized the sale of bycatch in 2001. Between 1997 and 2000 only 19&lt;U+2013&gt;29 whales were annually reported caught as bycatch. The number increased to 89 &lt;U+2013&gt; 137 annually between 2001 and 2004. However, the study concluded from genetic information that the actual amount of bycatch was similarly high prior to the 2001 regulations but was under-reported. Up to 46% of the samples tested proved to be J-stock.99
Prior to the 2001 change in regulations, fishermen could not legally sell minke whales to commercial firms and were supposed to sell them locally or destroy them and report the incident. The high percentage of J-stock bycatch presents a significant threat including the possibility of extinction within a few decades according to IWC population estimates.100
Imports
In 2009 Japan accepted imports of whale meat from Norway and Iceland for the first time in over a decade. The Norwegian shipment arrived in mid-2008 but was held by Japanese customs until January 2009 when the Japan Fisheries Agency finally approved the import.
The international trade of whale meat is prohibited by CITES (Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species). However, Japan, Norway and Iceland registered reservations with the treaty in order to remain exempt. The Norwegian company, Myklebust Trading, exports common minke whale and Iceland's Hvalur hf exports Fin whale, which is an endangered species. Environmental organizations criticized the trade and expressed doubts that Japanese markets could absorb the increase in supply as thousands of tonnes of whale meat remained in cold storage in Japan.101102 In 2010, Iceland's proposed quota in killing fin whales was much larger than the amount of whale meat the Japanese market could absorb. In negotiations with Marc Wall, Economic Minister-Counselor at the US embassy in Tokyo, Jun Yamashita of the Japanese Fisheries Agencies, however, rejected a 2010 proposal to suggest to Iceland to reduce the number of killed fin whales to a more reasonable number.103
Scientific research
After halting its commercial whaling, Japan began scientific research hunts to provide a basis for the resumption of sustainable whaling.104105 According to environmental groups and the Australian Environment Minister, the ostensible research serves to disguise commercial whaling in circumvention of the IWC moratorium.106107 The IWC Scientific Committee collects up-to-date data on catch limits and catches taken since 1985. Numbers have ranged from less than 200 in 1985 to close to 1,000 in 2007.108109110
The research is conducted by the Institute of Cetacean Research (ICR), a privately owned, non-profit institution. The institute receives its funding from government subsidies and Kyodo Senpaku, which handles processing and marketing of the whale meat. Japan carries out its whaling in two areas: the North-West Pacific Ocean (JARPN II) and the Antarctic Ocean (JARPA) Southern Hemisphere catch. The 2007/08 JARPA mission had a self-imposed quota of 900 minke whales and 50 fin whales.111
On March 31, 2014 the International Court of Justice (ICJ) stated its decision (by 12-4 votes) the Japan's whaling program was not for scientific purposes. The Court ordered that &quot;Japan revoke any extant authorization, permit or licence to kill, take or treat whales&quot; and refrain from granting any further permits.112
Catches
Japanese whale catches since the IWC moratorium113114
IWC &lt;U+2013&gt; Japan: Catches Under Objection (1985&lt;U+2013&gt;1988)115
Area
Fin
Sperm
Sei
Brydes
Minke
Total
N. Pacific
0
388
0
634
615
1,637
S. Hemisphere
0
0
0
0
3,882
3,882
Total
0
388
0
634
4,497
IWC &lt;U+2013&gt; Japan: Special Permit Catches (1988&lt;U+2013&gt;2013)116
Area
Fin
Sperm
Sei
Brydes
Minke
Total
N. Pacific
0
55
989
630
2,493
4,167
S. Hemisphere
18
0
0
0
10,442
10,460
Total
18
55
989
630
12,935
JARPA
The research program took place near Antarctica from 1988 to 2005. Its stated objectives were to determine mortality rates, whale stock numbers and structure, the role of whales in the Antarctic ecosystem and how environmental changes affect whales. The whaling operation alternated between several pre-established areas intending to take 400 or more minke whales per season.
In 1997 the IWC scientific committee officially reviewed the JARPA program. The committee expected reasonable precision and usefulness of the data collected but disagreed on whether lethal methods were necessary. It was also noted that the results could potentially allow for an increase in the number of minke whales annually taken.117
In the final 2007 review the committee agreed with the initial 1997 mid assessment. It recognized that progress had been made in identifying stock structure and at least two stocks were found in the research area. Agreed estimates of abundance could not be developed and preliminary estimates may only reflect major changes in abundance over a long time line. Problems were identified with age and mortality rate data. Krill-related work was welcomed but relatively little progress was made toward understanding the role of whales in the Antarctic ecosystem. Data on pollution was also welcomed but disagreement continued over the interpretation of the results. Levels of toxic pollutants were lower in Antarctic whales than those sampled in the Northern hemisphere.118119
The commission made note of the fact that the catches took place in the IWC established Southern Ocean Whale Sanctuary and that improving management of whaling in a sanctuary is unnecessary. The 2007-1 resolution on JARPA is one of several calling on Japan by majority vote to suspend its lethal research.120121
JARPA II
Like its predecessor, the research whaling program takes place near Antarctica. Starting in 2005 and continuing to the present day, objectives include monitoring the Antarctic ecosystem, modeling competition between whale species, recording changes in stock structure and improving future management of Antarctic whales. The program calls for 950 minke whales, 50 fin whales and 50 humpback whales per season.122
Disagreement over the value of the research, the use of lethal methods and the sample sizes continued in both the scientific committee and the commission. In 2005 and 2007 the commission passed resolutions by majority urging Japan to stop all lethal research in JARPA II.123124
On March 31, 2014 the International Court of Justice (ICJ) ruled that JARPA II was not for scientific purposes and forbade the granting of further permits.125 Following the ruling, Japan cancelled its Antarctic whaling hunt for the first time in more than 25 years, though it announced plans to propose a new research program designed to meet the standards set by the ICJ the following year.126
JARPN
From 1994 to 1999 Japan carried out its research program JARPN in the western North Pacific. Its stated goals were to improve knowledge of stock identity, improve Implementation Simulation Trials for North Pacific Common minke whales and act as a feasibility study for a program on feeding ecology. The program called for 100 minke whales annually. The results were reviewed by committee in February, 2000. The committee agreed that the information was useful for management but no consensus was reached on whether lethal methods of research were necessary.127
As with JARPA, the IWC issued resolutions calling for Japan to cease issuing permits for the take of minke whales citing concerns over the need for lethal methods such as the 1999-3 Resolution on whaling under Special Permit.128
JARPN II
JARPN II began with a feasibility study from 2000 to 2001 to continue taking whales in the western North Pacific Ocean including 100 common minke whales, 50 Bryde's whales and 10 sperm whales. The objectives of the program included study of feeding ecology (such as prey consumption), stock structure and the environmental impacts of cetaceans. In 2002 after the completion of the initial study Japan proposed and began a long-term program to study how feeding ecology relates to sustainable use in the Pacific and within Japan's Exclusive Economic Zone. In 2008 the program included a proposal for an annual take of 340 minke whales, 50 Bryde's whales, 100 sei and 10 sperm whales.129
Disagreement over the objectives, methodology, effect on stocks and overall success of the program continued in the scientific committee review of the feasibility study and full program. The full program introduced a change from previous use of the ICRW Article VIII research provision by not specifying an end date. The objectives were deemed unnecessary for stock management by some members and would not contribute significantly to previously identified research needs. The sample size and methods proposed were unlikely to satisfy program objectives and the ecosystem modeling was considered to be poorly developed.130
Some contended the program placed undue emphasis on assumed negative effects of cetacean predation on fishery resources while failing to address the effects of fisheries on cetaceans. However, others believed determining the effects of cetaceans on fish stocks and more information on minke stock structure to be critically important. Some stated the feasibility study would provide valuable information on methodology and other aspects of the program would improve over time and contribute to fundamental questions. The committee identified that the pollution objective did not contribute to the goals of the IWC Pollution 2000+ project but remained relevant to the IWC for long term study.131
Disagreement over the value of data obtained through lethal methods continued as well. Some argued that a wide range of questions could be answered through non-lethal means such as &quot;for pollutant monitoring (biopsy sampling for fatty acid and stable isotope analysis), for stock structure (photo identification, biopsy sampling and faecal sampling), and for feeding ecology (faecal sampling).&quot;132 Others argued that prey data was required for modeling purposes that could not be acquired through non-lethal means. However, feeding ecology was not necessarily relevant to stock management according to some who argued biopsy sampling would allow for a greater amount of statistical data.133
Argument continued over the potential negative effects of catches, such as stock depletion of O-stock and J-stock whales, when the only data on many of the populations came from selective extrapolations of JSV (survey) data. Proponents contended that the JSV data was reliable and the research area extended from coastal areas to offshore areas thus limiting pressure on coastal stocks.134
In 2000, 2001 and 2003 more resolutions were passed by the IWC urging Japan to cease issuing special permits for whaling and limit research to non-lethal methods.135136 The most recent Scientific Committee review was conducted in January, 2009.137
Publications
Over 120 publications have resulted from the lethal and non-lethal research conducted during the JARPA programs.138 Many of these articles are published in international peer-reviewed scientific journals, and some have both Japanese and non-Japanese scientists as co-authors. However, after killing 3,600 minke whales, the program produced just two peer-reviewed scientific papers since 2005.139 The presiding judge of the International Court of Justice ruled on 31 March 2014 that &quot;In light of the fact the Jarpa II has been going on since 2005, and has involved the killing of about 3,600 minke whales, the scientific output to date appears limited, Japan shall revoke any existent authorisation, permit or licence granted in relation to Jarpa II and refrain from granting any further permits in pursuance to the program.&quot;140
In 2008, a study based on data gathered by JARPA research was published in a peer-reviewed Western academic journal, Polar Biology. The study, for which 4704 whales were killed, implied that Antarctic minke whales lost 9% of their blubber over 18 years due to a lack of ocean resources such as krill.141 Lars Wall&lt;U+00F8&gt;e, a Norwegian of the University of Oslo, assisted with analyzing the data and claimed the study was first rejected by two other journals for political reasons.142 Nick Gales, of the Australian Antarctic Division, stated the study failed to address criticisms of its methodology when initially presented.143 The study contradicted previous JARPA studies indicating Antarctic minke whale populations were healthy.
Opposition
Anti-whaling governments and groups have strongly opposed Japan's whaling program. Greenpeace argues that whales are endangered and must be protected.144 The Japanese government claims that it strongly supports the protection of endangered species, and the scientific whaling is essential to gather information about the status of the various populations. It further claims that the scale of the research is such that it does not affect the stock of the species.145 The 1985 IWC estimate put the Southern Hemisphere minke whale population at 761,000 (510,000 &lt;U+2013&gt; 1,140,000 in the 95% confidence estimate).146 A paper submitted to the IWC on population estimates in Antarctic waters using CNB gives a population of 665,074 based on Southern Ocean Whale and Ecosystem Research Programme (SOWER) data.147
Research methodology has come under scrutiny as it has been argued that non-lethal methods of research are available148 and that Japan's research whaling is commercial whaling in disguise.149 The Japanese claim that the accuracy of tissue and feces samples is insufficient and lethal sampling is necessary.150
In 2002, the World Wildlife Fund published an open letter to the Japanese (in both Japanese and English text) in the New York Times signed by a group of international scientists, stating their assertion that &quot;Japan's whale 'research' program fails to meet minimum standards for credible science.&quot;151 They accused Japan of &quot;using the pretense of scientific research to evade its commitments to the world community.&quot; Signatories to the letter included Sylvia Earle (former Chief Scientist of the NOAA), Giuseppe Notarbartolo di Sciara (former President of the European Cetacean Society) and Roger Payne (founder of the Ocean Alliance).
In Volume 53, No. 3 of the journal BioScience, twenty members of the Scientific Committee of the International Whaling Commission confirmed &quot;that the signers of the open letter correctly summarized criticisms made by researchers very familiar with Japanese scientific whaling&quot;, and that &quot;so little of any significance to IWC management can be obtained only from whaling catches that it is impossible to justify killing animals on this basis.&quot;152
A 2006 episode of the Australian Broadcasting Corporation's popular science show Catalyst, which strongly argued against whaling, reported that of the 18 year JARPA I program, which lethally obtained samples from 6800 whales, less than 55 peer-reviewed papers were produced, of which only 14 were claimed on the program to be relevant to the goals of the JARPA program, and that only four would require lethal sampling. Some of the research includes a paper named Fertilizability of ovine, bovine, and minke whales spermatozoa intracytoplasmically injected into bovine oocytes.153 Joji Morishita of JARPA has said the number of samples was required in order to obtain statistically significant data.
Sea Shepherd Conservation Society contends that Japan, as well as Iceland and Norway, is in violation of the IWC moratorium on all commercial whaling.154
Anti-whaling campaigners claim that the Japanese public does not support the government for its whaling policy.155156 However, all the major political parties from the right wing LDP to the Japanese Communist Party do support whaling.157158 The meat ends up at Tokyo's famed Tsukiji fish market and other high-end restaurants.159 People previously involved in the industry have reported rampant meat embezzlement.160
Japanese fisheries companies have expanded abroad and experienced pressure from partners and environmental groups. Five large fishing companies transferred their whaling fleet shares to public interest corporations in 2006.161 In 2007, Kyokuyo and Maruha, two of Japan's four largest fishing companies, decided to end their sales of whale meat due to pressure from partners and environmental groups in the US.162
The International Court of Justice ruled in March 2014 that Japan can no longer conduct its JARPA II program, rejecting the country's argument that it was for scientific purposes.163 All findings in the judgement refer specifically to the JARPA II program in the Antarctic, so the JARPN program in the NW Pacific is not affected.
Cultural aspects
Proponents of Japanese whaling (including the Government of Japan) often argue that it is a cultural practice which foreigners should not oppose on the basis of cultural differences.164 Joji Morishita of Japanese Fisheries Agency in 2001 noted that the Japanese public also feels that anti-whaling groups are covertly racist. With Norway and Iceland hunting whales on a commercial basis, according to Morishita, &quot;Singling out [Japan's] whaling is cultural imperialism &lt;U+2013&gt; some people would say it's racism. Norway and Iceland are also whalers, but the criticism of Japan is stronger.&quot;165 However, critics have forcibly attacked the &quot;cultural&quot; defense, with for example Sea Shepherd Conservation Society representatives comparing it to forced female genital cutting in Sudan, saying that although it is a practice that may have cultural roots, it still should be opposed out of necessity.166 A professor of environmental studies in Japan wrote in his book that Japan's modern commercial whaling bears little resemblance to the small-scale subsistence whaling that, until the dawn of the 20th century, was limited to certain coastal regions, and Japan's whale-eating culture was also very limited in scope and an invented tradition, only lasting 20 years from the end of World War II to the early 1960s to augment Japanese school lunch programs during the U.S. occupation.167
Debate in the IWC
The most vocal opponents of the Japanese push for a resumption of commercial whaling are Australia, New Zealand and the United Kingdom. The Australian government's stated purpose for opposing whaling is the need for conservation of endangered species; however, Japan's quota of 935 Minke whales (which are not endangered) each year only results in a loss 0.19% of the Minke Whale's population which is more than 515,000.168169170 The New Zealand government is opposed to hunting whales for food or research171 and the UK government believes &quot;that whaling does not serve any genuine need and involves unacceptable cruelty.&quot;172
In July 2004 it was reported that a working group of the Japan's ruling Liberal Democratic had drawn up plans to leave the IWC in order to join a new pro-whaling organization, NAMMCO, because of the IWC's refusal to back the principle of sustainable commercial whaling.173 Japan is particularly opposed to the IWC Conservation Committee, introduced in 2003, which it says exists solely to prevent any whaling. Any directives from the IWC are undertaken on a purely voluntary basis as state sovereignty means that there are few avenues by which international law can be enforced.
At an International Whaling Commission (IWC) meeting in 2006, a resolution calling for the eventual return of commercial whaling was passed by a majority of just one vote. There has been a failure to lift the ban on commercial whale hunting and Japan has since threatened to leave the IWC until the whaling moratorium has ended.174
In 2007 the IWC passed a resolution asking Japan to refrain from issuing a permit for lethal research in the Southern Ocean Whale Sanctuary &lt;U+2013&gt; the main Japanese whaling area.175 After a visit to Tokyo by the chairman of the IWC, asking the Japanese for their co-operation in sorting out the differences between pro- and anti-whaling nations on the Commission, the Japanese whaling fleet agreed that no humpback whales would be caught for the two years it would take for the IWC to reach a formal agreement.176
Australian opposition
 Due to the proximity to Antarctica, the government of Australia has been particularly vocal in its opposition to Japan's whaling activity in the Southern Pacific. In 1994, Australia claimed a  exclusive economic zone (EEZ) around the Australian Antarctic Territory, which also includes a southerly portion of the IWC Southern Ocean Whale Sanctuary. In December 2007, the Rudd government announced plans to monitor Japanese whalers about to enter Australian waters in order to gather evidence for a possible international legal challenge177178179180 and on January 8, 2008 the Australian government sent the Australian customs vessel Oceanic Viking on a 20-day surveillance mission to track and monitor the fleet.181 On February 7, 2008, the Australian government released photographs of the ICR harpoon ship Yushin Maru killing several different whales, and a mother whale and her 1-year-old calf being taken on board the Nisshin Maru for processing (see photos at right and top of page).182 The Australian government also used that opportunity to reject ICR's scientific research claims by calling them &quot;without foundation&quot;, and declaring that &quot;You do not have to kill a whale in the Southern Ocean to gain a deeper understanding of it.&quot;183
In late 2009, the Prime Minister of Australia restated official objections to Japan's whaling programs and threatened to take legal action through international courts.184185
International Court of Justice (ICJ) proceedings
On May 31, 2010, the Australian Government lodged formal proceedings against Japan in the International Court of Justice (ICJ) in The Hague, Netherlands.186 In a joint ministerial statement, the government stated that it &quot;has not taken this decision lightly.&quot;
On January 5, 2011, leaked US diplomatic cables revealed that the Australian legal challenge to Japanese whaling was heavily influenced by domestic political pressures and Australian government advisers were left deeply pessimistic about the prospects of success in the International Court. In its reports to Washington, the US Embassy reported that Australian government contacts were stating that the legal proceedings &quot;... would be unlikely to stop the whale hunt entirely, but could well force modifications that would make it more difficult for the Japanese&quot;.187 The Australian public overwhelmingly supports governmental efforts to stop Japanese whaling, even at risk of losing valuable trade relations.188 The New Zealand government lodged a &quot;Declaration of Intervention&quot; with the ICJ on February 6, 2013,189 in which it deemed Japan as ineligible for a Special Permit that would allow whaling on the basis of scientific research.190
As a result of the Australian government's 2010 application, a court case was heard at the ICJ. The hearing ran from June 26, 2013 until July 6, 2013. In its deposition to the ICJ, the Australian government has claimed that Japan &quot;has breached and is continuing to breach&quot; its obligations under the international convention, and further asserted that Japan has refused to accept International Whaling Commission (IWC) recommendations. Solicitor-General of Australia Justin Gleeson appeared for Australia before the ICJ.191
The ICJ's 16-judge bench received and then decided upon the case. Rothwell stated that the case &quot;is a complex one which raises novel legal issues not previously considered by any international court&quot;.192
Tony Press, CEO of the Antarctic Climate and Ecosystems Cooperative Research Centre at the University of Tasmania, Australia, provided weekly reports of the ICJ hearings for The Conversation Australia media publication. Following the second week, Press relayed that Japan articulated in certain terms its intentions in the Southern Ocean: &quot;the proper conservation of whale stocks and thus make possible the orderly development of the whaling industry&quot;, further explaining that a whale must be killed to obtain certain types of information, such as the collection of ear plugs to estimate the age of a whale. During the second week, Professor Lars Wall&lt;U+00F8&gt;e, of the University of Oslo and a former Norwegian Commissioner to the Whaling Commission was presented by Japan as its sole expert witness.193
During the week beginning 8 July 2013, New Zealand delivered its intervention, in which it provided a history of the origin of the 1946 Whaling Convention and Australian Attorney-General Mark Dreyfus affirmed that his nation had not &quot;colluded&quot; with New Zealand to launch the ICJ proceedings. Dreyfus concluded Australia's contribution by emphasising the friendship shared by Australia and Japan, and stated: &quot;Australia respectfully requests the Court to bring Japan&lt;U+2019&gt;s whaling program to an end.&quot;194
The ICJ hearing concluded on July 16, 2013. In Japan's final presentation Professor Payam Akhavan of Harvard University stated: &quot;&quot;it would not be an exaggeration to say that Australia&lt;U+2019&gt;s case now hangs by a thread&quot;.195
Outcome
On March 31, 2014 the ICJ ruled that Japan's whaling program was not for scientific purposes. The Court ordered that &quot;Japan revoke any extant authorization, permit or licence to kill, take or treat whales&quot; and refrain from granting any further permits.196 The court's judges agreed with Australia that the number of Japanese scientific research publications were not proportionate to the number of animals killed.197 Two former Australian Environment ministers applauded the decision and stated their hopes that Japan will respect it.198 The decision of the ICJ is final and the right of appeal does not apply in this context;199 Japan said it would abide by the decision.200201
Opposition by environmental groups
 The Japanese whaling fleet had several clashes with anti-whaling protesters and activists from various groups, including the Sea Shepherd Conservation Society, endeavoring to follow, document and disrupt the whaling fleet since the 2005&lt;U+2013&gt;2006 season. On January 15, 2008 two crew members traveling on the MV Steve Irwin boarded the whaling ship Yushin Maru 2 without permission and were subsequently detained on board the ship for a number of days. Japan claimed that four crew members on board a Japanese whaling ship in Antarctic waters were injured March 3, 2008 when the anti-whaling group threw butyric acid on board.202
Japan confirmed the later throwing of &quot;flashbang&quot; grenades onto the Sea Shepherd Conservation Society ship, MV Steve Irwin by their whaling factory ship, Nisshin Maru. Japan also confirmed firing a &quot;warning shot&quot; into the air. The captain of the Steve Irwin, Paul Watson, claimed to have been hit in the chest by a bullet from a Japanese whaling ship crewmember, and a piece of metal was found lodged into his bullet-proof vest he was wearing at the time.203 However, the Japanese government has denied the incident, but admitted that the whalers launched &quot;noise balls&quot;, described as &quot;loud explosive deterrent devices&quot;.204 Furthermore, the Sea Shepherd group has disclosed allegations by its members that the episode was faked to gain publicity.205 On February 7, 2009 the MV Steve Irwin and the Yushin Maru No. 2 collided as the Japanese vessel was attempting to transfer a whale. Both sides claimed the other had been at fault.206207208
In 2008, two Greenpeace anti-whaling activists, Junichi Sato and Toru Suzuki, also called the Tokyo Two were arrested and put on trial after trying to expose what they considered a theft ring within the whaling industry. An investigation was conducted into these practices, but was shortly ended concluding that the meat was taken as a souvenir and thus legal to possess.209210211 After his trial, Sato, Greenpeace Japan's Director of Oceans Campaign said that Greenpeace is moving away from a confrontational strategy and is using words to persuade Japan to end the hunts.212 He feels that outside groups do not have a good understanding of Japanese culture which can result in some actions having counter-productive results.
In January 2010, it was revealed that the Japanese whaling fleet was chartering flights in Australian planes from Hobart and Albany to track the Sea Shepherd ships' movements and provide information on their location to the whaling fleet so the fleet could evade them. The flights were heavily criticised by the Australian Greens.213
On January 6, 2010, the anti-whaling ship Ady Gil suffered severe damage to its bow after a collision with the Japanese whaling ship Sh&lt;U+014D&gt;nan Maru No. 2.214 The Ady Gil was abandoned and left to sink after it had taken on too much water to be towed. While the first officer of the Bob Barker has said that all the fuel, oil, batteries and other environmental contaminates were removed from the Ady Gil before towing began,215 photographic evidence released by the Institute for Cetacean Research showed the wreckage continued to leak fuel into the Southern Ocean after it had been abandoned by Sea Shepherd.216
Japan's Fisheries Agency announced on April 12, 2010 that the whaling fleet had caught about half of the 935 whales it has hoped to catch during the 2009&lt;U+2013&gt;2010 whaling research season as a result of obstruction by Sea Shepherd Conservation Society protest operations. The whalers harvested 506 southern minke whales and one fin whale.217 In February 2011, the Sea Shepherd Conservation Society caused Japan to call off annual whaling in Antarctic waters.218
Atsushi Ishii, Japanese political scientist and professor at Tohoku University's Center for Northeast Asian Studies stated in his 2011 book, Kaitai Shinso: Hogei Ronso (&quot;Anatomy of the Whaling Debate&quot;), that Japan used the activities by conservationists like Sea Shepherd as a face-saving excuse to stop the unprofitable Antarctic hunt. Ishii asserts that the activities of environmental and animal rights activists were actually counterproductive because they fueled nationalism and increased the demand for whale meat in Japan. Ishii predicted that Japan would shift its whale hunting efforts to coastal waters and the Northwest Pacific.219
In December 2011, The Japanese government confirmed that US$29 million out of their supplementary post-earthquake and tsunami reconstruction budget was spent to provide extra security to ensure the &quot;stable operation&quot; of the Japanese whaling fleet.220221
International opposition
On March 6, 2008 members of the International Whaling Commission met in London to discuss reaching an agreement on whale conservation rules.222 Japanese whalers and anti-whaling activists clashed in the waters near Antarctica on March 7, 2008, with each side offering conflicting accounts of the confrontation.223 The IWC called upon the Sea Shepherd Conservation Society to refrain from dangerous actions and reiterated its condemnation of any actions that are a risk to human life and property in relation to the activities of vessels at sea.224
Japan has continued to face accusations of vote-buying within the IWC, as an increasing number of developing countries with little or no tradition of whaling join. On March 8, 2008, Solomon Islands' Prime Minister Derek Sikua said that Japan had offered to pay for his country's delegates to attend the March 6, 2008 IWC meeting in London, and that he had refused the offer. The whaling chief at Japan's Fisheries Agency denied the allegation. A week before that IWC meeting, Japan hosted delegates from Angola, Cambodia, Congo, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ghana, Laos, Malawi, Palau, Tanzania and Vanuatu in Tokyo. The delegates also visited the traditional whaling town of Taiji in western Japan.225
Commercial viability
Due to its low food self-sufficiency rate, around 40%, Japan relies on stockpiling to secure a stable food supply.226 As of 2009, Japan's 1.2 million ton seafood stockpile included nearly 5000 tons of whale meat.227 Japan has started to serve whale meat in school lunches as part of a government initiative to reduce the amounts.228 However, there has been criticism of serving whale meat to school children due to allegations of toxic methylmercury levels.229 The World Wildlife Fund has also estimated that the Japanese government has had to invest $12 million into the 2008&lt;U+2013&gt;09 Antarctic whale hunt alone just to break even, and that subsidies in total have amounted to approximately $150 million since 1988.230
One study found levels of mercury in whale red meat at 6 times the limit set by the US FDA for food. Whale meat can also be contaminated with polychlorinated biphenyls. Critics claim that, because of contamination, it constitutes a health risk. Thus children and pregnant women are advised to refrain from eating whale meat.231232233 After British environmental group exposed e-commerce company Rakuten as the world's biggest online retailer of whale meat and elephant ivory, Rakuten told on 4 March 2014 to its online retailers that it will stop providing them with dolphin and whale meat.234
2010 IWC meeting
At the 2010 meeting of the International Whaling Commission in Morocco, representatives of the 88 member nations discussed whether or not to lift the 24 year ban on commercial whaling. Japan, Norway and Iceland have urged the organization to lift the ban. A coalition of anti-whaling nations has offered a compromise plan that would allow these countries to continue whaling, but with smaller catches and under close supervision. Their plan would also completely ban whaling in the Southern Ocean.235 More than 200 scientists and experts have opposed the compromise proposal for lifting the ban, and have also opposed allowing whaling in the Southern Ocean, which was declared a whale sanctuary in 1994.236
Media attention
Western media attention regarding Japan's whaling industry has increased. Animal Planet's television series, Whale Wars, places a camera crew on board the Sea Shepherd Conservation Society anti-whaling activist ships to document the annual interference with Japan's Antarctic whaling program. Japan has denounced the program as deceptive and supportive of eco-terrorists to increase ratings.237 Animal Planet has made requests to also film from the perspective of Japan's whaling fleet but the requests were denied.238
The animated series South Park lampooned both Japan's whaling traditions and the anti-whaling activists featured on Whale Wars in the episode &quot;Whale Whores&quot;.
A 2009 Oscar winning documentary, The Cove, focused entirely on Japan's dolphin drive fisheries, mercury content of dolphin meat and the whaling town, Taiji. The film also concentrated on the difficulty in observing Taiji fishermen at work due to obstruction from the local police.239
Peter James Bethune received a two-year suspended sentence after boarding the ship which collided with his, the Ady Gil.
The New York Times reported the whaling town of Ayukawa, in Ishinomaki, Miyagi was badly damaged by the 2011 T&lt;U+014D&gt;hoku earthquake and tsunami. After the Fukushima Nuclear Disaster in 2011, radioactive cesium was found in two minke whales caught off the coast of Hokkaido.240
See also
Aboriginal whaling
Convention of Kanagawa
Oriental Bluebird
Sea Shepherd's operations against Japanese whaling
References
External links
Official bodies
Whaling Section, The Fisheries Agency of Japan
Institute of Cetacean Research
The International Whaling Commission
Organizations
Japan Whaling Association
Sea Shepherd Conservation Society
Whales, dolphins, and porpoises at WWF International
Other
Whaling's Gruesome Catch &lt;U+2013&gt; image slideshow by Life magazine
Whales as natural resources - Master's thesis by Simona Vasileva Boncheva, on economic aspects
*Main



















http://japanwhaling.weebly.com/history.html
























 




























 

















The ICUN red list of threatened species - Fin Whale.












 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 







 




 Reporter/Producer: Dr Jonica Newby. (Transcript and full program available online)




























http://australianetworknews.com/stories/200912/2768399.htm?desktop




















http://www.icrwhale.org/eng/090206SS2.wmv







 

Kyodo News, &quot;Whale catch cut in half by protests&quot;, Japan Times, April 13, 2010, p. 2.






















