The Gardner News is a family-owned daily newspaper serving seven cities and towns in northwest Worcester County, Massachusetts. In addition to the city of Gardner, where it is headquartered, it also covers the rural towns of Ashburnham, Hubbardston, Phillipston, Templeton, Westminster, and Winchendon, Massachusetts.
The News publishes every day except Sunday. It is noteworthy for printing on one of the widest newsprint &quot;webs&quot; in New England daily newspapering. Its text is also printed in a larger font size than usual.
Its chief competitors are the county's two largest newspapers, the Fitchburg Sentinel &amp; Enterprise and Worcester Telegram &amp; Gazette.
History
Bell family
A family business since its founding as a weekly in 1869, The Gardner News has been a daily since 1897 and part of the Bell family since 1973, when C. Gordon Bell became president and publisher (he had been general manager of the company for a decade). During Gordon Bell's tenure as publisher, the newspaper modernized and was recognized as a leader among small New England dailies.1
Upon Gordon Bell's death in 1992, his wife Alberta Bell became publisher of the newspaper where she had worked since 1986.
The Leominster Times
During Alberta Bell's tenure as publisher, The Gardner News made one attempt at expanding its footprint, a six-month attempt in late 1994 to establish a new newspaper for Fitchburg and Leominster, Massachusetts. The Leominster Times was marketed as a general-interest newspaper, but Bell said she would make special efforts to cover minorities in Fitchburg and Leominster.2
Initially launched as a six-day daily newspaper (Monday through Saturday) in July 1994, The Times five months later cut back to a twice-weekly schedule and focused its coverage on Leominster only. Its January 6, 1995 issue was its last.3
References
External link
The Gardner News Website
Gardner News Category:Worcester County, Massachusetts
&quot;News Publisher C. Gordon Bell.&quot; Obituary. Telegram &amp; Gazette (Worcester, Mass.), February 9, 1992.↩
King, Ernest. &quot;Gardner News Co-Owner Plans New Newspaper.&quot; Telegram &amp; Gazette (Worcester, Mass.), May 1, 1994↩
&quot;Leominster Times.&quot; Telegram &amp; Gazette (Worcester, Mass.), January 18, 1995.↩
