Jubilee Hall is a royal palace built in 1913 during the reign of Mir Osman Ali Khan of erstwhile Hyderabad state. It is considered one of the architectural masterpieces of Hyderabad.
Its located in the green lawns of Public Gardens popularly known as Bagh-e-Aam.
History
framepx125|thumb|right|The Last Nizam,Osman Ali Khan In 1937, the silver jubilee coronation of the HEH Nizam VII was held here, hence the name. A special gold plated chair was made on this occasion with his crest inscribed. The chair is now exhibited at Purani Haveli.
The Nizam , on the occasion, was presented a lot of gifts, mementos, and souvenirs in the court which totaled at least $1,000,000. At the time the world was yet to see another Indian spectacle of pomp and power as that of the Jubilee Durbar, with warlike display of 10,000 Hyderabad troops.
Architecture
The building has an elegant facade built in the Indo-Persian style. At the center, a small but high stage for the throne of Nizam was built, in the shape of 'Dastar'(Crown) of the Nizam. It is clearly visible as the white square in the middle.
The huge rectangular hall of the Jubilee Hall, served as the State's Legislative Council for 27 years, before it moved to the present building.
The building and the pavilion in the internal courtyard are worth visiting. , appreciate the architecture but also the culture, which was instrumental in the building&lt;U+2019&gt;s construction. It is a unique landmark of an important phase of Hyderabad&lt;U+2019&gt;s architectural heritage.
The Royal works and paintings of original 1936 Durbar, still adorn the building.
The Jubilee hall is presently used as a state conference hall and for State Governments functions.
See also
Chowmahalla Palace
Purani Haveli
King Kothi Palace
Falaknuma Palace
Further reading
Fodor's India By Curtis, William, Fodor, Eugene, 1905- 1
Developments in Administration Under H.E.H. the Nizam VII By Shamim Aleem, M. A. Aleem 2
External links
The Hindu feature
Category:Hyderabad State Category:Visitor attractions in Hyderabad, India Category:Buildings and structures in Hyderabad, India
