The Industrial Relations Act 1971 (c.72) was an Act of the Parliament of the United Kingdom, since repealed. It was largely based on proposals outlined in the governing Conservative Party's manifesto for the 1970 general election. The act was highly controversial and was repealed in 1974 when the Labour Party returned to government.
Effect of legislation
The law limited wildcat strikes and prohibited limitations on legitimate strikes. It also established the National Industrial Relations Court, which was empowered to grant injunctions as necessary to prevent injurious strikes and also to settle a variety of labour disputes. The Act repealed portions of the Trade Disputes and Trade Unions Act 1927, which prohibited general strikes.
Trade union reaction
The Trades Union Congress under the leadership of General Secretary Vic Feather campaigned against the legislation with a nationwide &quot;Kill the Bill&quot; campaign. 1 On 12 January, 1971 the TUC held a 'day of action' in protest, with a march through London. In March, 1,500,000 members of the Amalgamated Engineering Union staged a one day strike. After the Bill received Royal Assent, in September 1971 the TUC voted to require its member unions not to comply with its provisions (including registering as a union under the Act). The Transport and General Workers Union was twice fined for contempt of court over its refusal to comply. However, some smaller unions did comply and 32 were suspended from membership of the TUC at the 1972 congress.
Protest
Campaigning against the Bill eventually coalesced around individual workers. When the Pentonville Five were arrested for refusing to appear before the National Industrial Relations Court and imprisoned in the summer of 1972, their case received great publicity. Eventually, the Official Solicitor intervened to order their release.
Repeal
Prime Minister Edward Heath called a general election over the issue of &quot;Who Governs Britain?&quot; in February 1974, during a lengthy dispute with the National Union of Mineworkers. Two days before polling day, the Director-General of the Confederation of British Industry Campbell Adamson made a speech in which he said &quot;I should like to see the next government repeal the Act so that we can get proper agreement on what should replace it&quot;. Adamson's statement made headlines, and was thought to have damaged the Conservative Party's election prospects. Adamson's statement was repudiated by CBI President Sir Michael Clapham, and he offered to resign (the offer was refused).
The incoming Labour government repealed the Act through the Trade Union and Labour Relations Act 1974.
Category:United Kingdom Acts of Parliament 1971 Category:Labour law of the United Kingdom
