 This list of Georgia Institute of Technology athletes includes graduates, non-graduate former students and current students of Georgia Tech who are notable for their achievements within athletics, sometimes before or after their time at Georgia Tech. Other alumni can be found in the list of Georgia Institute of Technology alumni; notable administration, faculty, and staff can be found on the list of Georgia Institute of Technology faculty. Intercollegiate sports teams at Georgia Tech are called &quot;Yellow Jackets,&quot; and are run by the Georgia Tech Athletic Association. The Athletic Association runs Georgia Tech's Hall of Fame, which has inducted many of Tech's greatest players throughout the program's history.
Despite their technical backgrounds and courses of study, many Georgia Tech students participate in college athletics, outdoor activities and other forms of sport. Georgia Tech offers seventeen varsity sports: Men's Football, Men's and Women's Basketball, Men's Baseball, Women's Softball, Women's volleyball, Men's Golf, Men's and Women's Tennis, Men's and Women's Swimming and Diving, Men's and Women's Track and Field, and Men's and Women's Cross Country. Approximately 150 Tech students have gone into the National Football League (NFL), with many others going into the National Basketball Association (NBA) or Major League Baseball (MLB). Some Tech players have also participated in the Olympic Games.
Well-known American football athletes include former students Calvin Johnson, Reggie Ball, and Keith Brooking, former Tech head football coaches Pepper Rodgers and Bill Fulcher, and all-time greats such as Joe Hamilton, Pat Swilling, Billy Shaw, and Joe Guyon. Tech's entrants into the NBA include Jarrett Jack, Luke Schenscher, Stephon Marbury, and Chris Bosh. Award-winning baseball stars include Mark Teixeira, Nomar Garciaparra, and Jason Varitek. In golf, the legendary Bobby Jones founded The Masters, David Duval was ranked #1 in the world in 2001, and Stewart Cink was ranked in the top ten.  
Olympics
American football
Basketball
Baseball
Golf
Track and Field
Other athletics
References
External link
Official Georgia Tech athletics site
Category:Georgia Institute of Technology Georgia Institute of Technology Category:Lists of American sportspeople
