thumb|Modern wasters. From the left: arming sword, longsword, rondel, longsword, falchion.  A waster (IPA pronunciation: ) (sometimes printed &lt;U+2018&gt;wafter&lt;U+2019&gt;) is a wooden practice weapon that approximates the dimensions, weight, balance, and physical characteristics of the weapon, usually a sword or dagger, that it represents. Used commonly in the Historical martial arts reconstruction community, the term refers to wasters fashioned to resemble western European weapons like the longsword or arming sword. Similarly, some Japanese martial arts use bokken or shinai as practice weapons.
Use
Historically, students and soldiers used wasters as inexpensive and expendable training tools. The cost of high quality steel weapons, especially swords, would have made them a poor choice for practice weapons. Constant training would fatigue the blade, rendering it far less effective and reliable as a weapon. To prevent the destruction of an expensive weapon and to permit the necessary training and sparring intrinsic to any martial art, wooden practice weapons were created with the intent of eventually being &lt;U+201C&gt;wasted&quot;, hence the term waster .
Today, especially in the recreation of Historical European martial arts, wasters have experienced renewed interest. Wasters provide a number of benefits to the modern practitioner, many of which would have applied to historic trainees as well. The wood construction coupled with unsharpened edges and blunted tip, crossguard, and pommel of wooden swords provides a safer alternative to practicing with a sharpened or unsharpened steel weapon. Wasters do not cut flesh, but provide a decidedly blunt impact. The lower cost of ownership in comparison to a steel weapon of the same variety makes the waster a much more affordable and expendable tool12. Many modern wasters are fashioned to replicate the original weapon with accuracy, including properly sized crossguards, discernible edges, functional pommels, and hilts with oblong cross-sections. These additions allow the weapon to be handled more like a steel version and contribute to the appropriate balance and weight of the weapon.
Wasters are not without their faults. The all wooden construction usually makes wasters somewhat lighter than their steel counterparts, and causes them to lack the exact balance of steel weapons. The difference of material properties between wood and steel creates a difference in performance when training and sparring. The wood wasters tend to recoil from strong contact with other wasters as may occur in a strong parry or absetzen3, a phenomenon colloquially referred to as &quot;waster bounce&quot;. Steel weapons do not display this attribute to the same extent, usually binding and sliding instead. The hard wood and rounded edges of wasters makes them considerably safer for practice than a steel weapon, but does not make them totally safe. Strong cuts or thrusts to vulnerable body parts during sparring may lead to significant damage to the individual. Wasters provide a safer, though less genuine, experience than steel weapons4.
Modern historical martial arts reconstruction organizations, including the Association for Renaissance Martial Arts 5 and the Chicago Swordplay Guild 6 use wasters as the primary training tool of new practitioners. Wasters are used to learn, practice, and later spar with a variety of techniques including cuts, slices, thrusts and wards. Participants may also use wasters against a pell, a padded pole. As the individual becomes more skilled, they will begin to use blunt steel weapons which offer a more realistic set of properties in comparison with a sharpened metal blade.
Construction
The quality of a waster is dependent primarily on the type and the quality of the wood used, the design of the weapon, and the skill of the craftsperson. Naturally, a waster made from a fine specimen of a hardy wood and crafted well in an efficient design will last longer under normal use than a waster with one or more inferior qualities.
Most wasters produced today are made primarily of hickory, a hard and resilient wood that is available for a relatively low cost. Some producers allow individuals to accent the waster with wood of other types including Brazilian Cherrywood (Jatoba) and purpleheart. Manufacturers usually apply a coating of linseed oil or other protective liquid and instruct users to regularly apply it. This prevents splintering and works to create a stronger, more enduring tool. It should be noted that different specimens of wood of the same variety are not necessarily identical in performance, and may display different characteristics during use.
Modern wasters also incorporate a form that permits them to replicate the use of a steel sword more truthfully. Like swords, wasters feature an edged blade and are not cylindrical in shape. Instead, most are lenticular or hexagonal, with the edges providing rounded sides. This shape continues into the hilt, which features an oval shaped cross-section oriented in the the same direction as the blade. An integral part of steel swords, this oval shape permits the wielder to know the swords current blade alignment by feeling for the rotation of the hilt in their hand, with one dimension of the grip being noticeably thicker than the other. Also included are pommels that act as suitable counterweights for the blade as well as a stable gripping surfaces. This supplies the swords intrinsic balance and allows the user a weighted leverage point for more powerful manipulation of the blade. A functional cross acts as it does on a steel sword, assisting in defense or, when half-swording, becoming a weapon itself as in the mordhau.
History
Wooden practice swords have been in use since the Late Bronze Age, with some original wooden swords still in existence in the National Museum of Edinburgh. Wasters are mentioned in period works, including The Book of the Courtier. A number of Fechtb&lt;U+00FC&gt;cher also mention the use of wasters or depict them in use by models showing proper technique.
During the 16th century, the Dussack came into use in German fencing schools. A true waster, the dussack was made almost entirely of wood (in all but one known case) and acted as safe and cheap training weapon. The weapon's unique shape did not lend well to the replication of traditional cruciform-hilted swords like the arming sword or longsword. Instead, the dussack resembled the gro&lt;U+00DF&gt;es Messer or &quot;great knife&quot;, a weapon found more often amongst the common people than longswords, the cost of which allowed only relatively wealthy individuals to purchase them.
See also
Bokken a form of waster used in Budo
Dussack a specific form of German waster
Federschwert a steel practice sword
References
These works have been used for multiple large portions of this article and as collective citations of characteristics of modern wasters. They have not been cited individually as references to prevent an unwieldy list of footnotes from a few sources.
Clements, John. Get Thee a Waster! - Used within Use &amp; History sections.
Little Raven. Frequently Asked Questions - Used within Use &amp; Construction sections.
New Stirling Arms. About Our Wasters - Used within Use &amp; Construction sections.
Purpleheart Armoury. Frequently Asked Questions - Used within Use &amp; Construction sections.
Notes
Category:Historical European martial arts Category:Swordsmanship Category:Martial arts terms
Albion Swords Provided to show cost of steel swords for comparison.↩
Arms and Armour Swords Provided to show cost of steel swords for comparison↩
Lindholm, D. &amp; Svard, P. Sigmund Ringneck's Knightly Art of the Longsword page 229. Paladin Press, 2003.↩
Lindholm, D. &amp; Svard, P. Sigmund Ringneck's Knightly Art of the Longsword page 15. Paladin Press, 2003.↩
Association for Renaissance Martial Arts - Methods of Training↩
Chicago Swordplay Guild - Frequently Asked Questions↩
