The sexual abuse scandal in the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Portland in Oregon in the United States is an important chapter in the series of Catholic sex abuse cases in the United States. During its course in July 2004, the archdiocese under Archbishop John George Vlazny filed for bankruptcy.
Bankruptcy
The Archdiocese of Portland filed for Chapter 11 reorganization on July 6, 2004. Portland became the first Catholic diocese to file for bankruptcy.1
An open letter to the archdiocese's parishioners explained the archbishop's motivation:
This is not an effort to avoid responsibility. It is, in fact, the only way I can assure that other claimants can be offered fair compensation. We have worked diligently to settle claims of clergy misconduct. In the last four years, we have settled more than 100 such claims. Last year alone the Archdiocese paid almost $21 million from its own funds. Major insurers have abandoned us and are not paying what they should on the claims.
Two cases are set for trials beginning today. One plaintiff seeks more than $130 million in compensatory and punitive damages, the other $25 million. We have made every effort to settle these claims fairly but the demand of each of these plaintiffs remains in the millions. I am committed to just compensation. These demands go beyond compensation. With 60 other claims pending, I cannot in justice and prudence pay the demands of these two plaintiffs.
The archdiocese had settled more than one hundred previous claims for a sum of over $53 million prior to the filing seeks to protect parish assets, school money and trust funds from plaintiffs: the archdiocese's contention is that parish assets are not the archdiocese's assets. Plaintiffs in the cases against the archdiocese have argued that the Catholic Church is a single entity, and that the Vatican should be liable for any damages awarded in judgment of pending sexual abuse cases.2
After the filing, an April 29, 2005 deadline was set by the bankruptcy court to allow other people to file complaints. According to an October 2005 archbishop's column in the Catholic Sentinel, nearly 200 more claims of all kinds were filed as a result. That column also noted that the archdiocese has filed suit against insurance companies to compel them to contribute financially to the settlement expected to arise out of the reorganization.
A press release issued by the Archdiocese of Portland on April 17, 2007 announced a settlement plan had been reached and a bankruptcy court had approved a financial plan of reorganization.3
Criticisms of Archbishop Levada
Some have criticized how Archbishop William Levada is alleged to have dealt with priests who had committed sexual abuse in Portland and in San Francisco.4 According to Catholics for a Free Choice, a pro-abortion rights lobbying group not affiliated with the Catholic Church, Levada &quot;shielded a pedophile in the Diocese of Portland, Oregon, for approximately nine years, which helped lead to the bankruptcy of the diocese and earned the wrath of survivor groups for his actions on the Vatican&lt;U+2019&gt;s commission to revise the US bishops&lt;U+2019&gt; sex abuse norms.&quot;5
Relationship with the Fairbanks diocesan scandal
The lawsuits in the Fairbanks diocese have also affected the Jesuit chapter in the diocese of Portland, given that the Western Province of the American Jesuits is located in the State of Oregon.67
See also
Abuse
Charter for the Protection of Children and Young People
Child abuse
Child sexual abuse
Essential Norms
National Review Board
Pontifical Commission for the Protection of Minors
Religious abuse
Roman Catholic Church in the United States
Sexual abuse
Sexual misconduct
Spiritual abuse
References
External links
Audits, Child And Youth Protection; US Conference of Catholic Bishops
Charter For The Protection Of Children And Young People; US Conference of Catholic Bishops
Child And Youth Protection; US Conference of Catholic Bishops
National Review Board, Child And Youth Protection; US Conference of Catholic Bishops
Safe Environment, Child And Youth Protection; US Conference of Catholic Bishops
Victim Assistance, Child And Youth Protection; US Conference of Catholic Bishops
Category:Catholic sex abuse cases Category:Child sexual abuse Category:Child sexual abuse in religious groups Category:Roman Catholic Church sex abuse cases in the United States Category:Roman Catholic Ecclesiastical Province of Portland
Portland Archdiocese ends bankruptcy with $75 million settlement↩
Portland Archdiocese releases 20,000 documents on the priest sex abuse scandal↩
Press release issued by the Archdiocese of Portland↩
San Francisco Chronicle, May 21, 2003, online here.↩
↩
More than 500 abuse victims&lt;U+2019&gt; claims filed in Jesuits&lt;U+2019&gt; Oregon Province bankruptcy case↩
Jesuits' Oregon province, facing abuse lawsuits, files for bankruptcy↩
