The Final is a revenge horror film directed by Joey Stewart1 and starring Marc Donato, Jascha Washington and Travis Tedford.2
Plot
The film begins in a black and white sequence when a girl with a hood on walks into a burger joint, she orders and the cashier has a startled look when she sees her. When the girl walks into the restaurant everybody in the room is looking at her. A boy in the room asks his mom &quot;Why does the lady look like that?&quot; The mom tells him to stop, everybody now is staring at her. It is revealed that the girl has a distinctive burn on one half of her face. Suddenly, she yells at them to stop staring and says she did not choose to look that way.
The movie is then shown in a classroom where a South Asian boy is constantly being bullied by a much larger tormentor. Another scene shows a girl named Emily, who is by her locker, is approached by three girls who emotionally attack her and taunt her for crying. Then it goes to show two boys, Jack and Dane, in a field setting up bear traps. At lunch, the outcasts are all sitting quietly at a lunch table until one of the bullies throws his milk box on one of the bullied kids books. He approaches him, giving back his milk box. Another kid named Kurtis, who is friends with both the outcasts and the popular group, approaches the group of people and invites them to one of his video shoots on Friday. The outcasts say they like him and tell each other to make sure he does not end up in the party.
The next scene shows their home life, Dane talks to himself and points a gun at his own head while in his bedroom, while his parents fight downstairs. Another scene shows Ravi at home with his family, in a depressing quiet life where nobody even looks at each other except for the house maid. At the video shoot Bradley and Tommy both confront Ravi and Dane in the washroom at break Ravi camera and Bradley tells Dane that he bullies him because he will not do anything about it. Ravi tells Kurtis about what happened and Kurtis warns Bradley to leave Parker alone causing the two to fight. Jack, leaving his home, is talking to his father who is a mechanic, about what he is going to do. He tells him that he has a letter about it and that he'll probably be angry. The dad, obviously ignoring him, continues on as Jack leaves.
At night Bradley and two others are pulled over by the cops on their way to a party, and caught smoking marijuana. They are let go after getting almost all their weed confiscated. The group of outcasts are around a fire talking about hell and doing Gods work in tormenting their tormentors. They put on costumes and blend in with a costume filled house with a hidden camera. They then lace a punch bowl with chloroform causing everyone to pass out.
The people in the party awaken to a loud noise from a boom box and are in chains. One of the boys, who is an outcast, mocks the situation. They then bring a gun severely cutting a boys face and then his leg. They pull him to a room where they then ask who wants to be let go. One of them raises their hand and runs away just to step on one of the bear traps while being pursued by other outcasts on ATVs and dirt bikes. Bradley, the worst tormentor, is stabbed in the back several times by Dane, severing his spinal cord, leaving Bradley sobbing and begging for his life.
Kurtis is secretly given a key by Ravi and runs out to make it to a mans house who kills the motor vehicle kids and then gets killed himself after walking into a trap. Later on, Ravi gets stabbed in the heart by Dane when he finds out. Kurtis calls the police and saves another boy from being de-tongued. He shoots Andy as Dane orders him to cut his tongue out and Kurtis gets shot in the arm by Dane. Dane walks up to him about to finish the job and Emily shoots Dane, saving Kurtis. Emily says that she has had enough and Jack also, Jack shoots Emily and as Jack is about to shoot himself the cops arrive and say it's not worth it, and Jack says, &quot;It's too late&quot;.
The next scene shows a news reporter detailing the outcast gang as a group of students who had tortured the group &quot;without cause&quot; (the irony being, of course, that they had plenty) and paints their victims in a saint like manner. Kelly, one of the survivors who was not tortured or disfigured, unlike Bridget and Heather, proceeds to take a bunch of pills to kill herself as she suffers from survivors guilt (and the knowledge that she, in part, caused everything that occurred). Kurtis, who now has a cast, is shown to be still scared after he hears somebody with a dirt bike implying that his escape from death is still affecting him (the boy on the motorcycle is actually the surviving outcast member). The ending scene goes back to the same black and white sequence where it is revealed that Bridget, who got her face burned by Emily was the one from the beginning of the film.
Cast
Marc Donato as Dane
Jascha Washington as Kurtis
Whitney Hoy as Bridget
Julin as Heather
Lindsay Seidel as Emily
Laura Ashley Samuels as Kelly
Justin S. Arnold as Bradley
Travis Tedford as Andy
Eric Isenhower as Jack
Vincent Silochan as Ravi
Farah White as The Reporter
Release
The film is part of the After Dark Horrorfest 20103 and was presented on January 29.4 The DVD was released on March 23 by After Dark Films.5
Reviews
The Movie Spot gave the film a 3.5 out of 5 saying &quot;The Final is a decent movie. And a great entry to the Horrorfest series.&quot;6
References
External links
ru:&lt;U+0424&gt;&lt;U+0438&gt;&lt;U+043D&gt;&lt;U+0430&gt;&lt;U+043B&gt; (&lt;U+0444&gt;&lt;U+0438&gt;&lt;U+043B&gt;&lt;U+044C&gt;&lt;U+043C&gt;)
Category:2010 films Category:American films Category:English-language films Category:2010s drama films Category:2010s horror films Category:2010s thriller films Category:American drama films Category:American horror films Category:American thriller films Category:Films set in Texas Category:Psychological thriller films
Exclusive Trailer Debut: After Dark's The Final↩
mermaid heather: After Dark Horrorfest 4: The Final↩
Where Can You See After Dark Films' Horrorfest 4?↩
After Dark Unveils Its Horrorfest 4 Poster↩
Horrorfest 4 DVDs Get a Release Date↩
↩
