

MC Skat Kat is an animated cat who appeared with Paula Abdul in the video for her song Opposites Attract in 1989. The idea of Skat Kat came from the Gene Kelly movie Anchors Aweigh, in which Kelly's character dances with Jerry, the mouse from the Tom and Jerry cartoon series. He was animated by members of the Disney animation team, working outside the studio between major projects, under the direction of Chris Bailey.
The character released an album entitled The Adventures of MC Skat Kat and the Stray Mob in 1991. Several of the songs made reference to Paula Abdul, but she did not provide vocals (except for the intro in &quot;On the Prowl&quot;); she did, however, make an appearance in the video of &quot;Skat Strut&quot;,1 the only single to be released. Despite the popularity of its music video (it became one of the most requested on MTV), the video never made an impact on any US Billboard chart. The release of the album flopped quickly after being issued in that same year.
MC Skat Kat also appeared in &quot;Yakety Yak - Take it Back&quot;, a Public Service Announcement produced by the Take It Back Foundation in 1991. The music video featured appearances by celebrities including Pat Benatar, Natalie Cole, Charlie Daniels, Lita Ford, Quincy Jones, B.B. King, Queen Latifah, Kenny Loggins, Randy Newman, Tone Loc, Ozzy Osbourne, Brenda Russell, Barry White, Stevie Wonder and a special appearance by Bugs Bunny in an updated version of &quot;Yakety Yak&quot; retooled with a message about recycling. It premiered on MTV on April 10, 1991 (National Recycling Day), appeared as a trailer at AMC movie theaters, and was distributed on VHS and CD. It was later shown occasionally on Sesame Street during the early 1990s, although no Sesame Street characters were present. The video also appeared once on Nickelodeon in 1995.
MC Skat Kat was created by Michael Patterson and performed by The Wild Pair duo of Bruce DeShazer and Marv Gunn on &quot;Opposites Attract&quot;. He was also voiced by Romany Malco for the first rap of the song and by Derrick 'Delite' Stevens for the second rap, the latter of whom provided vocals for the character in the MC Skat Kat Solo album effort.
Physical Appearance
Skat Kat has a flat-top and a small, square soul patch and wears a white tanktop, blue, baggy pants with black suspenders, and big tennis shoes. He sported an earring on his left ear starting with the album artwork and the Skat Strut music video.
The Stray Mob

Fatz — a short, raspy voiced cat who first appeared in the Opposites Attract video and made a brief cameo appearance with Skat Kat in &quot;Yakety Yak - Take it Back&quot;. He wears a round, green cap with an orange stripe and a zigzag pattern on it, a light-orange shirt, a sea-green vest, blue pants, a medallion (originally blank in Opposites Attract before it gained a peace symbol), and sometimes sunglasses. He also wears tennis shoes similar to Skat's, but slightly smaller. He is the most frequently heard character of the Stray Mob. His talents include beat boxing (Skat Strut) and playing the saxophone (Kat Stories). Formerly voiced by &quot;Squeak&quot; of the College Boyz.
Taboo — a tall cat with black fur who appeared alongside Fatz in the Opposites Attract video. He wears a yellow t-shirt, red shorts, and shoes identical to Skat's. He also has a few tan-colored stripes on his tail. He is explicably and momentarily heard during the song Kat Stories. Formerly voiced by &quot;Rom&quot; of the College Boyz.
Leo — a brawny mutt who seldom gets along with Skat, as evidenced in the Skat Strut video. He wears a maroon tanktop, orange and white striped shorts (orange and black on the album artwork), dark gray glovelettes, and light blue hat with a back flap. He's supposedly the driver of a turquoise-colored limousine with a mind of its own, as suggested in New Kat Swing.
Micetro — a grayish mouse who made a silent appearance in the Opposites Attract video. He was seen mouthing the words &quot;We can boogie on down&quot; in the Skat Strut video. In the middle of the latter video, he holds up a baton like he was a maestro; hence, the name.
Katleen — a cat with orange fur, a black-colored tip at the end of her tail, a pink hairdo, black-colored clothing, and light gray shoes. In the Skat Strut video, she also wore a blue bracelet or two and a necklace. Oddly, her name is shown to be the one providing the feminine voices in So Sweet So Young and I Go Crazy, since both voices sound different. However, in the unreleased Big Time music video, she not only had her own animated segments, but had her true voice heard as well.
Silk — a cat with brown fur. In the Skat Strut music video, she has reddish-brown hair, blue eyes, earrings, a dark purple skirt, a black top, a light green vest, and purple shoes. On the album artwork, she had black hair, a red, sleeveless shirt, and a black skirt.

Discography

1991: The Adventures of MC Skat Kat and the Stray Mob

In popular culture

In the 2009 Homestar Runner Halloween cartoon, Doomy Tales of the Macabre, Coach Z dresses up as MC Skat Kat.

References

External links

MC Skat Kat
Secret Spain MC Skat Kat page


Category:Fictional cats Category:Fictional rappers Category:Fictional characters from recorded music



YouTube - Paula Abdul &amp; MC Scat Kat - Scat Strut↩


