
Martie Maguire is an American songwriter, singer, multi-instrumentalist, and a founding member of the female alternative country band, Dixie Chicks. She won awards in national fiddle championships while still a teenager. Maguire is accomplished on several other instruments, including the mandolin, viola, acoustic bass, and guitar. She has written and co-written a number of the band's songs, some of which have become chart-topping hits. She also contributes her skills in vocal harmony and backing vocals, as well as orchestrating string arrangements for the band.
Maguire learned several instruments at a young age, honing her skills with her sister, Emily Robison (ne&lt;U+00E9&gt; Emily Erwin), by playing together with two other schoolmates for over five years as a part of a high school touring bluegrass quartet. After graduation, the sisters forged an alliance with two other women they had met through the Dallas music scene, Laura Lynch and Robin Lynn Macy, forming a bluegrass and country music band, busking and touring the bluegrass festival circuits for six years. After the departure of Macy, and the replacement of Lynch with singer-songwriter Natalie Maines, the band widened their musical repertoire and appearance. The result was a trio so commercially successful that it took the country music industry by surprise, with a number of hit songs, albums, and awards that has set records. Maguire subsequently stood by her bandmates as they were engulfed in political controversy.
Early life
Martha Elenor Erwin (nicknamed &quot;Martie&quot;) was born October 12 1969, in York, Pennsylvania,1 but was raised in Addison, a northern suburban town on the edge of Dallas, Texas, with an older sister, Julia, and younger sister, Emily, to parents Paul Erwin and Barbara Trask. Encouraged by her parents- both educators at private schools - Maguire began playing classical violin violin at age five, and by age 12, was learning to play &quot;fiddle style&quot;, with a birthday gift of fiddle lessons, 2 and was active in her school orchestra.3 Emily Erwin, (later known as Emily Robison), three years her junior, also shared an early talent, interest and love of music, and the two were provided musical instruction on several instruments. Because of this, although Maguire became famous for her ability in vocal harmony, and mastery of the fiddle, she also plays a variety of stringed instruments that include the viola, guitar, mandolin, and bass.4
By 1983, Maguire was touring with her sister Emily and school friends; siblings Troy and Sharon Gilchrist.5 The sisters showed an &quot;almost obsessive&quot; interest in busking at small venues and attending bluegrass festivals.6 The four students formed the teenage bluegrass group &quot;Blue Night Express&quot;, playing together for 5 years, from 1984-1989,7 while still attending private Greenhill School (Addison, Texas).8 &quot;We'd drive down to the west end of Dallas and open our cases, and that was our job,&quot; Maguire said of it in a later interview to 60 Minutes II correspondent Dan Rather. &quot;That's how we made money in high school.&quot;9 In 1987, Maguire, known then still as Martha Erwin, was awarded second place for the fiddle in the National fiddle championships held yearly in Winfield, Kansas. After graduation of high school, with Robison yet to complete her secondary school studies, from 1988 to 1989, Maguire attended Southwestern University in Georgetown, Texas, performing in the school orchestra there and again in the National fiddle championships, earning third place that year.10
With the Dixie Chicks
In 1989, Maguire and Robison joined guitarist Robin Lynn Macy and Laura Lynch on bass in the Dixie Chicks, playing what was at the time predominantly bluegrass music and a mix of country standards. Originally listed as Martha, and then Martie Erwin, Maguire played fiddle, mandolin, viola and harmonized with Robison on backing vocals within the band.11
Maguire had begun writing and recording songs on their debut independent album, Thank Heavens for Dale Evans; and in 2001, one song, co-written with Laura Lynch called &quot;Pink Toenails&quot; resurfaced. The song was featured in the film, Don't Say A Word, with Skye McCole Bartusiak performing the number.12
When their second album had a more polished sound, Maguire commented, &quot;I hope our fans won't be disappointed [in The Little Ol' Cowgirl]; it's got drums on every track; it's no longer bluegrass, but we have to make a living and you can't do that playing bluegrass.&quot;13
Two albums later, after Natalie Maines assumed the position of lead vocalist, the band was revitalized. Maguire said of their music, &quot;It's very rootsy, but then Natalie comes in with a rock and blues influence. That gave Emily and I a chance to branch out, because we loved those kinds of music but felt limited by our instruments.&quot;14
Maguire co-wrote the song, &quot;Cowboy Take Me Away&quot;, recorded on the current Dixie Chicks sophomore studio album Fly for her sister Emily, during her courtship to country music singer Charlie Robison.15 Maguire was singled out by BMI in 2000, and awarded Songwriter of the Year for writing and/or co-writing &quot;Cowboy Take Me Away&quot;, &quot;Ready To Run&quot; and &quot;You Were Mine&quot;; the last being co-written with Robison, about their parent's divorce.16
In 1999, the Dixie Chicks performed two songs, recording a cover of the song, You Can't Hurry Love as well as Maguire's &quot;Ready to Run&quot; for the film Runaway Bride, starring Richard Gere and Julia Roberts.17 In 2003, Maguire was nominated for a Tony Award for co-composing the film score to Urban Cowboy; the musical, using the song she had co-written, &quot;Cowboy Take Me Away&quot;.18 In addition, Maguire played fiddle on the song, &quot; Somewhere Down The Road&quot; on Deryl Dodd's debut album.
After the band achieved massive commercial success with its first two albums with Maines, they struggled with their record company over artistic direction on the third. Maguire commented, &quot;I don't think any of us ever trusted Nashville. When you're in that town you know everybody is talking about everybody else. Everybody is wishing for the other guy to fail.&quot;19
Although Maguire and Robison often appear quiet and demure compared to their animated bandmate Natalie Maines, the trio have stood united on controversial subjects since they banded together to play in 1995, even when their opinions have had the potential to serve them more harm than good. In 2006, Maguire said, &quot;I'd rather have a smaller following of really cool people who get it, who will grow with us as we grow and are fans for life, than people that have us in their five-disc changer with Reba McEntire and Toby Keith. We don't want those kinds of fans. They limit what you can do.&quot;20
Personal life
Martie married pharmaceutical representative Ted Seidel on June 17, 1995, and changed her surname to his, becoming Martie Seidel, as well as the stepmother to his son, Carter. Brad Paisley emerged as a new country music singer who co-wrote a song about child watching as his mother kept being rejected by her dates because she had a child, and the gratitude the boy felt to the man who was able to care for them both. Martie wrote to tell him she was moved both because she was now a stepmother, and had a stepfather as well. The song was called,&quot;He Didn't Have to Be,&quot; and Maguire joined him in performing it onstage in a concert on a CMT showcase program, &quot;On The Verge&quot;, saying the song &quot;struck a chord&quot; in her&quot;.21 However, her marriage did not last, and she and Ted Seidel were divorced in November, 1999.22
At bandmate Natalie Maines' sister Kim's wedding Martie met Gareth Maguire, a Roman Catholic teacher and actor from Northern Ireland. The couple became engaged in June, 2001, and married August 10, 2001, in a civil ceremony in Hawaii. Later they had a Catholic &quot;blessing&quot; ceremony in the groom's hometown, Carnlough in County Antrim, Ireland, on March 9, 2002, for all the guests that were not able to attend the first wedding. She said of the ceremony that the Catholic Church would not permit a wedding service due to her prior divorce. Maguire says ruefully that there were so many &quot;special&quot; people that they'd wanted to include, but that they just couldn't wait to marry.23 Part of the reason for the rush was Gareth's need to keep flying back and forth because of visa considerations. 24 After her marriage, Martie changed her name to that of her new husband, which is why in her musical career she has had the surnames of Erwin, Seidel, and now, Maguire.
In a strange turn of fate, all three bandmates are related. Because Martie and Emily are sisters, and Natalie Maines' sister Kim Maines married Shane Maguire, who is the brother of Gareth Maguire, Martie's husband, Natalie became sister-in-law by marriage to Martie.
Martie and Gareth have three daughters: fraternal twins Eva Ruth and Kathleen 'Katie' Emilie, born April 27, 2004, and third daughter, Harper Rosie Maguire, born July 25, 2008.
Maguire has been frank about using invitro fertilization to conceive their twins. In an interview in Conceive Magazine, she said, &quot;All my paperwork said 'unspecified origin'. We spent three years of active trying before we went to IVF. First I went on Clomid. Then I had some dye tests and found I had a collapsed tube, so I had laparoscopic surgery; the tube wasn't blocked, just spasming.&quot; After three attempts at intrauterine insemination, she said, she and her husband didn't think it was worth continuing in that manner, and switched to IVF.25 In August 2007, Maguire began IVF again, resulting in their third daughter Harper.
Regarding the number of children the Dixie Chicks have produced in the past seven years, (Maines has two and Robison has three in addition to Maguire's twins and newborn) Maguire told People Magazine, &quot;We'll have to move over and let the little chicks take over! We've got a new band!&quot;26
Maguire and Robison co-wrote a song, &quot;So Hard&quot;, about their own personal experiences with infertility and their need to rely on other methods to conceive. They speak out about the difficulties they faced, but also their good fortune; both having options that for many women are financially prohibitive. Mentioning the stigma attached to IVF, Magurie said, &quot;I think we feel a responsibility to break down some barriers. It's much more of a common problem than people realize.&quot;27 A final concern Maguire mentioned was the question of what to do with all the unused frozen embryos. &quot;Now that I have children, I see those embryos as possible children. So I have to think about what my options are if there are leftovers again. I could keep them in storage, and maybe they will help my children some day. Or I can try to donate them to stem cell research. I don't think I could give them to another family,&quot; she admits. &quot;I would always worry: what if it's an abusive family? What if they don't get enough love?&quot;28
Awards

Discography


Maguire played fiddle on the song, &quot; Somewhere Down The Road&quot; on the eponymous album, Deryl Dodd by Deryl Dodd on Sony.

References

External links


Official Dixie Chicks Band Website



id:Martie Maguire it:Martie Maguire fi:Martie Maguire sv:Martie Maguire
Category:1969 births Category:American buskers Category:Country fiddlers Category:American songwriters Category:American vegetarians Category:American violinists Category:Dixie Chicks members Category:Grammy Award winners Category:LGBT rights activists from the United States Category:Living people Category:Mandolinists Category:Multi-instrumentalists Category:People from York, Pennsylvania Category:Musicians from Dallas Category:American singer-songwriters



TV Guide↩
Ladies' Home Journal(Retrieved 13 March, 2008)↩
Gilchriest, Gail The Dixie Chicks Put Cowgirl Chic Back in the Saddle Elle Magazine 1991↩
Leggett, Steve All-Music Guide writer on MSN (Retrieved 9 March, 2008)↩
Jam Base Sharon Gilchrist↩
Frost, Jane Walnut Valley Festival in Winfield, KS, Early 1980s The All-Inclusive Dixie Chicks Page↩
Gilchrist, SharonFaraway Hills Retrieved 12 February, 2008↩

Rather, Dan 60 Minutes II Dixie Chicks Not Whistling Dixie The Trio Has Sold 17 Million CDs 6 September, 2002 Retrieved 26 June, 2008↩
Walnut Valley Association 1987 and 1989 National fiddle championships in archive Retrieved 2 March, 2008↩
Superior Pics Retrieved 23 March, 2008↩
(Retrieved 22 March, 2008)Yahoo Movie Review for Don't Say a Word↩
Clark, Renee Can the Dixie Chicks make it in the big time? Local Heroes (Transcribed from) Dallas Life Magazine, Dallas Morning News, March 1, 1992(Retrieved 23 January, 2008)↩
Malkin, Nina↩

Hillman, Chris Entertainment Weekly (Retrieved 21 April, 2008)↩
Lyrics to Runaway Bride Soundtrack↩
Dixie Chicks website (Retrieved 9 March, 2008)↩
Martie Maguire, to The Los Angeles Times, 5/21/06. Flippo, Chet (May 25, 2006) CMT News Nashville Skyline: Dixie Chicks, Dixie Chicks, Dixie Chicks↩
↩
Paisley, Brad &quot;He Didn't Have To Be&quot; (Retrieved 20 January, 2008)↩

CMT Online, CMT Online (Retrieved 25 September, 2005)↩
Minchin III, James R. and Lieberman, Ellen InStyle Magazine; February 2003, Vol. 10 Issue 2, pg. 244 Retrieved 25 September 2005]↩
↩
People Magazine (accessed 28 January, 2008)Dixie Chick Martie Maguire Is Expecting↩
Frontpage Publicity Dixie Chicks Website↩



