
Netaji Subhash Engineering College (NSEC) is an engineering college of Eastern India located in Kolkata, West Bengal, India. The college was established in 1998. It is situated at Techno City, Panchpota, Garia in the southern part of Kolkata. It ranks as one of the top engineering colleges in the state of West Bengal12
History
Netaji Subhash Engineering College (NSEC) was set up, keeping in mind the ideals of Netaji Subhash Chandra Bose, whose contribution to the Indian Freedom Movement remains invaluable forever. Netaji had dreamt of vibrant, strong and powerful India, an India which would be independent and self reliant, not only politically, but also in the spheres of Education &amp; Technology. He strongly believed that true independence can only stem from strong base in education and technology. The college was set up in the year of 1998 in collaboration with the Techno India Group and The Institute of Computer Engineers (India). The college started with three engineering courses and today, it is one of the largest self-aided engineering colleges in West Bengal.
Admission

Undergraduate

The admission procedure is based on the West Bengal JEE (WBJEE) and AIEEE.

Post Graduate

M-Tech admissions are offered through Graduate Aptitude Test in Engineering examination as well as personal interview. '''MCA ''' admission entrants are required to qualify the state level entrance test named JECA (Joint Entrance for Computer Application).
Administration

Organisational structure of NSEC


The Academic Council consists of all the Faculty Members, Registrar and Librarian
The Academic Committee consists of senior faculty members for day-to-day monitoring of academic activities.
Regular interactions take place with the student representatives
Regular meetings with HODs for an exchange of views

Departments
The courses offered by NSEC are approved by the All India Council for Technical Education (AICTE). The college is affiliated to the West Bengal University of Technology (WBUT).
The departments in the college are:
Department of Electronics
The Department of Electronics Engineering was established in the year 1998.

Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering
Department of Electronics and Instrumentation Engineering
Department of Communication Engineering (M-Tech)

Department of Bio-Medical Engineering
The Department of Bio-Medical Engineering was formed under the Department of Electronics in the year 2002. It became a full-fledged separate department in the year 2009 offering the B.Tech program in Bio-Med Engineering.
Department of Computer Sciences
The Department of Computer Sciences was established in 1998 and was the first one to be accredited by NBA.

Department of Computer Science Engineering (B-Tech and M-Tech)
Department of Information Technology

Department of Electrical Technology
The Department of Electrical Technology was instituted in 1998.

Department of Electrical Engineering
Department of Control and Instrumentation Engineering (M-Tech)

Department of Computer Applications
The Department of Computer Application was established in the year 2001.

Department of BCA
Department of MCA

Department of Management
The Department was started under the Basic Science and Humanities department and was later turned into a full-scale facility offering the Bachelors Program in Business Administration.
Accreditations
NSEC is approved by:3

West Bengal University of Technology
All India Council of Technical Education
National Board of Accreditation (NBA)
Ministry of Human Resource Development, Government of India

NBA and TEQIP
In 2005 the college was given accreditation from the National Board of Accreditation (NBA) for B.Tech in Computer Science and Engineering, Electronics and Communication Engineering, Electrical Engineering. In April 2008 the same accreditation was given for Information Technology.4 The college was also selected for an educational grant from the World Bank in its Technical Education Quality Improvement Program (TEQIP) as one of the few institutes in West Bengal.5 NSEC ranked Second in Project Implementation of TEQIP (following Jadavpur University which achieved first place in West Bengal).6 The institute is regarded as one of the best in West Bengal based on the number of students who prefer this college over many other private engineering colleges of the state.7
Eminent faculty members
This list is not comprehensive.

Prof.(Dr.) A K Mullick (ECE); former faculty and Dean of the Radar Center, IIT Kharagpur.
Prof.(Dr.) S. Das (ECE); formerly faculty of Jadavpur University
Prof. (Dr.) D.K Mitra (ECE); former GM of Philips
Prof.(Dr.) A K Ghosh (ECE);
Prof. A Laha (ECE); Senior Advisor to industrial sectors in India and abroad.
Prof. (Dr.) C J Singh (ECE)
Prof. (Dr.) M K Ghosh (EE) former faculty of IIT Kharagpur
Prof.(Dr.) A Bhattacharya (CSE); author
Prof. (Dr.) Chandan Banerjee (CSE);
Prof.(Dr.) S.K Goswami (EE);
Prof. (Dr.) Partha Sarathi Pal (EE); Senior Research Fellow, IIT Kharagpur
Prof. (Dr.) G K Mahapatra (Chemical Sciences)
Prof. (Dr.) Dr. Sreya Pal (Physics)

PHOENIX and NIXAL
History of PHOENIX, the official tech club of Netaji Subhash Engineering College, dates back to 2006, when seven students from the college decided to form a platform that would think beyond just the academic courses that everyone study in the college. With the vision of forming a conglomerate of like minded people and to provide a secure platform to the juniors, these students formed the idea of &quot;Phoenix&quot; - As the Tech-Club. Initial beginning of phoenix was marked by a subscription of Rs. 100 from these 7 seniors, to today, when it has more than thousands of members. Every member of NSEC today is officially a member of Phoenix, and standing now, Phoenix has not only gained the position of &quot;Official Tech Club&quot; of the college, but also has become well known in other colleges. 
The entire functioning of Phoenix now stands on its four pillars, The PR Team, the Creative Team, the Database Team and the Web Team. Today, besides organizing the 3 mega events: Avenir - the annual tech fest, Brainstormer - The inter college quiz and Kurukshetra - the Intra college debate competition, Phoenix holds regular forums. Presently they are: The C Forum, The Robotix Forum, The SSPD forum and the Web Designing Forum, dedicated to the effort to equip the students with sound technical background and management skills, besides preparing them for campussing and job interviews and always striving for excellence and perfection. &quot;Come, Let's Rise&quot;, is the motto of the club8
Wiki Academy
The first Wiki Academy of Kolkata was set up at the college in collaboration with Wikimedia Foundation, India. The event witnessed large scale participation of students from various colleges and universities.
NIXAL
Nixal - the GNU/Linux user group of Netaji Subhash Engineering College (NSEC) was formed by the college. This group was the brainchild of a student of the Computer Science &amp; Engineering Department of the college. Nixal was inaugurated by Richard Stallman on 19 February 2003. The group was formed to learn about and contribute to GNU/Linux and spread the message of free software movement. This Group Follows The Open Source Software ethics.Though after 2005 the activities of NIXAL saw a gradual decline but lately there is an effort to revive it. NIXAL now comes to exists as an open-ended user group. 
Placements and Higher Studies
A majority of students from the college get placed in the software industry. A few students choose the core engineering sectors. The college has a healthy placement record.9 Many students also opt for higher education, pursuing the likes of Masters/PhD or MBA in various institutes of India and abroad. Most students of NSEC get placed in multinational companies such as Tata Consultancy Services, Accenture, IBM, Microsoft, Apple Inc., Ericsson, Oracle, SAP AG, HCL Enterprise, Cognizant, Infosys, Wipro, Siemens, Tata Elxsi and alike and in nationalized sectors such as National Thermal Power Corporation, Air India, Steel Authority of India Limited, BSNL, etc. Defence establiahments like the Indian Air Force and the Indian Army visit the campus to take students from the college.10 NSEC records the highest placements in the Techno India Group. Alumni from the college can be found in various universities worldwide such as: Imperial College London, University of Southern California, Ohio State University, McGill University, Vanderbilt University, Arizona State University, Drexel University, Clemson University, Auburn University, University of Florida, University of Cincinnati, University of Illinois at Chicago, University of Southampton, State University of New York at Buffalo, University of Utah, University of South Florida, Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, University of Kiel, National University of Singapore etc. Many students have earned a place at the Indian Institute of Foreign Trade, Management Development Institute, XLRI and the Indian Institutes of Management.

NSEC Alumni Association

Student activities
The students of the college take part in National Level Competitions. Some of the major competitions are

National and International Competitions (popularly known as Techfest) organized by Indian Institutes of Technology, National Institutes of Technology, etc.
National Level competitions organized by various chapters of IEEE.

College events
Apart from academic events, the college calendar has a number of other major events:
Freshers' Welcome


The Freshers Welcome is organized to introduce first year students to college life. The freshers welcome titled BLOSSOMS has seen students' performances as well as bands like Fossils, Eshaan, Colors, Cactus and other Bangla Bands.


Annual Cultural Fest


MESMERIZER, the annual cultural fest of NSEC usually held in March/April is often regarded as one of the best college fests of Kolkata sponsored by companies like IBM, Wipro, NIIT, Air India, Coca-Cola and Hero-Honda. The cultural program is a mixture of rock and classical music. It started in 2002, the first Fest of NSEC. That same year the first batch of B.Tech passed out from NSEC. That time the guest performers were Chandrabindoo, Nachiketa, Cactus and Bhoomi. Celebrities who have performed at the college include KK, Kunal Ganjawala, Neeraj Shridhar, Javed Ali, Euphoria, Bombay Vikings, Bangladeshi Band Miles, Bangla bands like Lakkichhara, Cactus, Fossils, Eeshaan, Prithibi, Morruddyan, Chandrabindoo, Bhoomi and Under Ground Authority.


Annual Tech Fest


The Annual Tech Fest Avenir is one of the earliest Tech Fests of Kolkata was set up with help from Kshitij of Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur. The tech fest has seen participants from almost all major engineering colleges of India. It started in 2003 with a participation of 100 people. Over the years it has grown enormously with Avenir 2010 seeing participants count of over 2000 from all major engineering colleges of India.


Student associations
There are two broad student associations in the college.

General Body of the Students
Bangladeshi Engineering Student Society (BESS)

References

External links


Netaji Subhash Engineering College - Official website
Netaji Subhash Engineering College Placement - Official website
Netaji Subhash Engineering College Alumni Association - Official website
Netaji Subhash Engineering College Annual Cultural Programme / Fest - Official website
Netaji Subhash Engineering College - A Techno India Group College - Techno India Group NSEC Link



Category:Educational institutions established in 1998 Category:Colleges affiliated to West Bengal University of Technology Category:Engineering colleges in West Bengal



http://www.inspirenignite.com/top-engineering-colleges-in-west-bengal/↩
http://www.myengg.com/engg/info/10251/top-best-engineering-colleges-in-west-bengal/↩
http://www.nsec.ac.in/pages/affiliations↩
NBA Accreditation NBA Website in the article: List of New Accredited Programmes of Technical Institutions of 19 JULY 2008↩
Techno India Group Techno India Group Website↩
The Telegraph Kolkata February 12, 2008 The Telegraph Website↩
http://www.telegraphindia.com/1100802/jsp/calcutta/story_12759295.jsp↩
http://www.phoenixnsec.org/intro.asp↩
http://www.nsec.ac.in/pages/placement_details↩



