
&quot;Max&quot; is the eighteenth episode of the fourth season of television series The X-Files. As Mulder and Scully's investigation of the apparent downing of Flight 549 by a UFO continues, they encounter deadly opposition from the military which continues to cover up the truth of the incident.
Plot
Agent Fox Mulder (David Duchovny) is caught by a group of commandos after swimming to shore. In Washington, Dana Scully (Gillian Anderson) tends to the critically wounded Agent Pendrell while Garrett escapes. Assistant Director Skinner arrives shortly aftewards and tells Scully that the orders to protect Frish have been countermanded and he's being arrested for providing false testimony. Scully releases Mulder from confinement and tells him the 'official' explanation for the crash, that Frish and Gonzalez caused the crash by mistakenly vectoring a military fighter craft with the plane, and that Frish has been lying to cover it up. Mulder is skeptical of this latest explanation and thinks the crashed UFO he found underwater is really what was involved in the crash. Scully tells Mulder that Sharon isn't really Max's sister, but rather an unemployed aeronautical engineer who met Max in a mental institution. She also tells him that Agent Pendrell died from his wounds.
Mulder and Scully visit Max's trailer, and watch a tape of him where he talks about finding proof of alien existence. The military recovers the crashed UFO from the lake, including the alien body. The agents visit Millar, whose invesigation has been unable to prove or disprove the military's cover story. Mulder tells Millar what he believed really happened. Mulder believes that Max boarded the plane with proof of alien life and that a UFO stopped the plane, abducting him. A military aircraft intercepted the two however, with orders to attack the UFO. While Max was being returned, the military aircraft struck, causing both the UFO and plane to crash.
Mulder visits Max's trailer again and looks at his mail, finding a luggage claim ticket. Scully visits Sharon, now in a mental institution, who tells Scully that she stole technology from her employer that Max believed was alien. The device was in three parts, one which she had, one that he brought on the plane and a third one. Mulder uses the claim ticket to obtain the third device at a New York airport and heads on a plane to return to Washington. Garrett, who is also aboard sits next to him. Mulder soon realizes who Garret is and holds him at gunpoint. Garret doesn't care, telling Mulder that if he shoots him the plane will depressurize and he'll be able to escape with a parachute he has with him. Mulder has Garret go to the bathroom but Garrett soon comes out with a plastic gun and orders him to hand it over. Suddenly the plane starts shaking and light shines in. When the plane touches down and Mulder gets out both Garret and the device are gone and Mulder is missing 9 minutes, having no memory of what happened. The agents visit Sharon one last time in Max's trailer and say goodbye.1
Production
The story itself originated from the special effect's man, Dave Gauthier who thought it would be &quot;cool&quot; to create a story with a person being alien abducted during a flight. The writers decided to kill of Special agent Pendrell in this episode. At the bar were Pendrell was shot, the assistant director of the filming crew wanted a part, saying &quot;you know, i can act&quot; to Kim Manners. So Val Stefoff got the part as the bartender.2
The very first scene was shot in a small tank across the street from North Shore Studios in Vancouver, Canada. When filming the scene, they used wide lenses because the actors didn't really have much room for swimming. The point of this, was to make it look like the actors are actually covering some ground, while in reality they only swam ten to twelve feet. The following scene with Fox Mulder (David Duchovny) reached the shore, it was freezing and it was raining. Manners has commented that the acting crew was a bit slacker than usual because of it, he further commented that Duchovny was able to run from two horses when filming the episode &quot;Tunguska&quot;, but was unable here to run from two men.3
The airplane was created by the special effects crew. The created airplane used 400 gallons of hydraulic fluid, it was ten feet of the ground and it held around eighty passengers. It would roll 22 degress to the left and later 22 degress to the right. It took days to shot the alien abduction scene. The cockpit was shot in a &quot;real&quot; flight simulator, while not actually being a part of the airplane itself. The scenes were shot separately at the Vancouver Airport.4
References

External links


Max at TV.com


4.18: Max Category:1997 television episodes



↩

↩



