The United States Marine Corps' Maritime Special Purpose Force, or MSPF, are a unique specialized sub-unit that are drawn from the Marine Expeditionary Units' major subordinate elements. They are special operations (capable) forces deployed to give the commanders low profile, two-platoon surgical emplacement in the accessible littoral regions. The MSPF provides the enhanced operational capability and precision skills to complement, enable, and execute in selected conventional, maritime special operations. Or even in other operations that are not resident in traditional amphibious raid companies.
The MSPF provides the MEUs in rapid direct action capabilities, to augmenting or replace the unavailable Force Reconnaissance, or Force Recon, platoons. It enables the Marine Corps's only deep recon unit, Force Recon, to continue providing FMF-level reconnaissance without delay.
Although, they cannot operate independently of its parent MEU as it relies fully on the it for logistics, intelligence, communications, transportation, and fire support. However, they are capable of conducting operations with, or in support of the operators of the United States Special Operations Forces. The MSPF's task organization are often conformed as an addition of the Amphibious Ready Group&lt;U+2019&gt;s Naval Special Warfare task unit detachment.
Organization
The Maritime Special Purpose Force structure contains a covering element that is consisting of one or more reinforced rifle companies. Usually a specially trained platoon from the MEU(SOC) boat company. Plus, an assault element, or AE that contains the deployed Force Recon The DAP are organized to conduct on-scene command, assault, security, and support functions. The R&amp;S element is organized to conduct reconnaissance and surveillance, sniper control and support, counter-intelligence, human and signal intelligence, and electronic warfare.1
Command Element
The commander of the MSPF are designated by the MEU(SOC) commander. The command and control remains with the MEU(SOC) Commander.

Commander, MSPF
Team(s), Communications Det
Team(s), Human Exploitation Team (HET)
Team(s), Medical Section
Team(s), Intelligence section from MEU(SOC)

Security Element
The security element is normally structured around a platoon provided by the BLT and may be augmented by the NSWTU embarked with the Amphibious Ready Group. The security element will act as a reinforcing unit, a support unit, a diversionary unit, or an extraction unit.

Rifle Platoon (-) (Rein)
SEAL Strike Platoon, Naval Special Warfare Team Unit, PRIBRON (as required)

Assault Element (AE)
The AE is the main effort of the MSPF and is organized to perform assault, explosive breaching, internal security, and sniper functions. The assault function will normally be executed by the FORECON detachment. Mission-specific augmentation (e.g., additional sniper support, specialized demolitions, explosive ordnance disposal, SIGINT/EW, etc.) will be provided from other MEU(SOC) assets or from the NSWTU embarked with the ARG.

Det, Force Recon direct action platoon (DAP).
Team(s), Security
Team, EOD Det
Team(s), Combat Photo Det

Support Element
The support element normally is composed of assets from the BLT Reconnaissance Platoon and Scout Sniper Platoon (R&amp;S/sniper support) coupled with elements of the ACE, RADBn Det, COMM det, and HET assets from the MEU(SOC) CE. Additional capability may be provided by the NSWTU embarked with the ARG.

Recon Platoon from Battalion Landing Teams (BLT)
Radio Recon Team (RRT), Radio Battalion Det.,
Surveillance and Target Acquisition (STA) Sniper Platoon

Aviation Support Element The aviation support eleent of the MSPF is a task organized portion of the Marine Air-Ground Task Force's MEU Aviation Combat Element. They are capable of precise night-vision flying and navigation, various insertion/extraction means and forward arming and refueling point operations. The specific structure of the aviation support element will vary depending on the lift requirements and distance to the crisis site.
References




Marine Corps Order (MCO) 3120.9B, Policy for Marine Expeditionary Unit (Special Operations Capable), (Wash., DC: Dept. of the Navy, 2001); Section 6:6↩


