 Jim Patterson Stadium is a baseball stadium in Louisville, Kentucky. It is the home field of the University of Louisville Cardinals college baseball team. It hosted the 2007 NCAA Super Regionals, where the Cardinals defeated Oklahoma State two games to one to advance to the College World Series in Omaha, Nebraska. In 2010, the Cardinals ranked 30th in Division I college baseball in attendance, averaging 1,940 per home game.1  The stadium was built on a former &quot;brown field&quot; site which had been abandoned for over 20 years. The site was split in half when Central Avenue was built through the area, with the original brick office building for the company remaining intact on the north side of the road and the remaining sections bulldozed. The office was refurbished and is now home to the Jewish Hospital Sports Medicine clinic, which was relocated from downtown. There is additional leasable space in the building which features the University of Louisville Family Medicine Clinic, a 24 hour non-emergency medical clinic that is featured by the university's student health insurance.
The project to build the stadium was simultaneous with the redevelopment of the southern half of the property on the other side of Central Avenue into a  shopping center, with a UofL themed Kroger store as its anchor. All of the site is owned by Faulkner Hinton &amp; Associates, including the stadium itself. UofL currently holds a 99 year lease on the stadium site.
The stadium has 1,500 chairback seats, with several knolls along the outfield wall which seats an additional 1,000 people. The stadium opened in 2005 and is named after former Louisville baseball player and founder of Long John Silver's, Jim Patterson. Patterson donated $5 million of the complex's $10 million cost.
Image:Picture_1078.jpg| Jewish Hospital's &quot;L&quot; Care Sports Medicine Center at Patterson Stadium File:Jim Patterson Stadium, brick from Parkway Field.jpg| The beams of Patterson Stadium are made of brick from historic Parkway Field File:Jim Patterson Stadium, batter's box.jpg| Patterson Stadium's batter's box, viewed from behind the protective netting File:Jim Patterson Stadium, press box.jpg|Patterson Stadium's press box File:Jim Patterson Stadium, 3rd Street view.jpg|Patterson Stadium viewed from 3rd Street
References




Category:College baseball venues in the United States Category:Louisville Cardinals baseball Category:Sports venues in Louisville, Kentucky



↩


