
Vixen is a fictional character, a superhero in the DC Comics universe. She was nearly the first female black DC superhero to star in her own series, but the first issue of her series was cancelled in the DC Implosion in 1978, never to be released. (It was subsequently printed in Cancelled Comics Cavalcade.) Her first appearance distributed to the public was in Action Comics #521 (1981).
Fictional character biography
In ancient Africa, there was a legend that the warrior Tantu asked Anansi the Spider to create a totem that would give the wearer all of the powers of the animal kingdom, if they would use the power to protect the innocent. As shown in the pages of Animal Man, it is possible that the &quot;Anansi&quot; who Tantu met, may have been a member of the alien race who gave Buddy Baker the ability to tap the Morphogenetic field. According to the Animal Man series Mari&lt;U+2019&gt;s Tantu totem may tap into that same field. Tantu used the totem to become Africa&lt;U+2019&gt;s first legendary hero. The totem was later passed down to Tantu&lt;U+2019&gt;s descendants until it reached the McCabes.
Growing up barefoot in a small African village in the nation of M'Changa, Mari Jiwe McCabe heard the legend of the &lt;U+201C&gt;Tantu Totem&lt;U+201D&gt; from her parents. She was the daughter of Reverend Richard Jiwe, the village priest, who was her sole caretaker, as poachers killed her mother years ago. Reverend Jiwe himself was killed by his half-brother (Mari&lt;U+2019&gt;s uncle) General Maksai. Makasai wanted the Tantu Totem, which had been in Reverend Jiwe&lt;U+2019&gt;s possession.

Vixen meets Superman.

Now orphaned, she fled to America. She set up an identity for herself as Mari McCabe and used her beauty to become a well-known fashion model in New York City. She used her newfound wealth to travel the world. On a trip back to Africa, she came across her uncle, and stole back the Tantu Totem, using its power to become the costumed superhero Vixen.
After this, Vixen made only two appearances as a solo crime fighter: once fighting poachers in India (Action Comics #521) and then against the techno-psycho criminal, Admiral Cerebrus. (DC Comics Presents #68) In fact, she was a reluctant hero until the Justice League of America was reorganized by Aquaman. She applied for full-time League membership and was accepted. (Justice League of America Annual #2) During her time with the JLA, the totem was taken from her by General Maksai, who still sought its power. (Ibid #234-235) The totem would only grant its full power to those who would use it to protect the innocent, and caused it Maksai to be transformed into a raging beast. Maksai was killed in battle with Vixen. (Ibid #239) Vixen continued with that particular incarnation of the JLA until it was disbanded by the Martian Manhunter. (Ibid #261)
Around this time Vixen teams up with Animal Man again. She travels to his surburban house with knowledge a of a mysterious murderous force. Animal Man's own powers have become affected because of this force, as he finds himself unable to correctly access the right powers.
When the League disbanded, Vixen returned to modeling; but a Caribbean photo session turned violent, and Mari&lt;U+2019&gt;s colleagues were killed by drug smugglers. She appealed to the government, who turned the matter over to the Suicide Squad. She goes undercover to capture the drug kingpin Cujo, who had been revealed by footage shot during the shoot. Along with Captain Boomerang and Black Orchid, she destroys the operation, but not before she lost control and killed the criminal kingpin, too. Revolted by what she had become, she agreed to work with the Squad until her animal instincts could be curbed. (Suicide Squad #11-12)
She works with the Squad for some time, although when it was disbanded for a year Mari returned to modeling and even launched a successful line of clothing. Her failed romance with Ben Turner (the Bronze Tiger) made Vixen decline an offer to rejoin the Squad; but sensing a chance to help the tortured Turner, Vixen reluctantly agreed to return and served through the end of its existence. She ultimately gave up on a future with the Tiger, sensing that he would never admit to needing help. (Ibid #58)
After the Suicide Squad's heyday, Mari continued to do undercover work. She was drafted for at least one mission for Checkmate (the Squad's brother organization). (Hawk and Dove vol. 4 #2-5) At some point, she signed on to work with Oracle's Birds of Prey. She went undercover to investigate a strange &quot;superhero&quot; cult, where the leader was able to mind-control her. The Huntress tried to help her and was nearly killed by Vixen, but Vixen regained her senses and used the stubbornness of a mule to hold back the mind-control of the cult leader. She and Huntress then rescued the other brainwashed heroes. (Birds of Prey #69-72)
Vixen may still have trouble controlling her animal side while using the totem, as witnessed when she worked alongside the Flash to stop Gorilla Grodd. (Flash vol. 2 #44-46) She also served on one mission with the Justice League Task Force (JLTF #7-8); came to Wonder Woman's aid during a battle with Circe (Wonder Woman vol. 2 #174-175); and helped her former JLA comrades protect Lex Luthor (JLA/JSA: Virtue &amp; Vice). She then joins the loose-knit Ultramarine Corps (JLA #26) until they moved on to another universe. (JLA: Classified #1-3)
She also manages to remain active in the fashion industry.
Infinite Crisis

Vixen in One Year Later, art by Joe Bennet.

After the murder of Sue Dibny in the Identity Crisis miniseries, she mobilized alongside other heroes and was present when the original Firestorm dies during a battle with the Shadow Thief.
Vixen adopted a new uniform in Infinite Crisis #7, similar to the one worn by her television counterpart on Justice League Unlimited.
Her totem is stolen as part of a conspiracy by the villains Amazo and Solomon Grundy. Vixen manages to latch on to some of the powers in an effort to track it, yet becomes lost in the mindset of a flock of birds. She eventually regains her mind and literally drops out of the sky to other superheros in a battle agains Amazo. She becomes a charter member of the newly revamped Justice League of America. She is seen operating the League's holographic control room.
Powers and abilities

Vixen wears a mystic artifact object called the Tantu Totem, a fox-head shaped talisman given to her ancestors by the African trickster god Anansi. Vixen can make direct contact with Earth&lt;U+2019&gt;s Morphogenetic field, sometimes known as the Red. This allows her to mimic the abilities of any animal she can think of, by simply focusing on a specific animal&lt;U+2019&gt;s abilities and then drawing it directly from the field. She has demonstrated the ability to hold onto the Morphogenetic traits of an entire forest of animals.1 According to Justice League of America #5, the Tantu Totem is not the source of her powers; it merely prevents her link to the Morphogenetic field from overwhelming her mind. Currently, she seems to have to call out the the name of the animal she wishes to draw power from in order to use that power (such as saying &quot;cat&quot; before she could use the agility of a cat).
So far Vixen has been able to use: the telepathic and physical abilities of Gorilla Grodd,2 the flight of a hawk, the swimming ability of a dolphin, the speed of a cheetah, the echo-location of a bat, the wall-crawling of a spider, the jumps of a cricket, the constriction of an anaconda, the strength of a bull elephant, the senses of a wolf, the agility of a monkey, the debilitating shock of an electric eel, the regenerative abilities of earthworms,3 and the ability to spit venom like a spitting cobra. She has even been shown to be able to channel the powers of extinct animals, such as the saber-toothed tiger, and domestic animals like the Doberman pinscher.
Vixen&lt;U+2019&gt;s claws are particularly sharp and tough, enabling her to rend through a variety of substances, such as fabric, wood, even soft metals and cinder block with ease. Her claws are magically enhanced and have drawn blood from individuals who are considered highly durable like Geo-Force and Pre-Crisis Superman.45
Occasionally, she has been known to physically transform into animals—for example, she has shapeshifted into a wolf, a great horned owl, and a cougar. Whether the creators of that story intended to give her this ability, or they just were not familiar with her abilities has not been established. The totem also allows her to heal bruises and wounds within seconds by simply touching it.67 In JSA Classified Vixen shapeshifted into an humanoid wolf and later assumed the gills, fins, and lack of eyes of a blind-fish
It is unknown what would happen if Vixen tried to use her magical abilities on an alien animal, or if she would gain access to the morphogenetic field of another planet.
While the full extent of Vixen&lt;U+2019&gt;s control over the morphogenetic field is unknown, she has on occasions drawn pure energy from it and displayed this energy as a force field and energy claws.8 While in cooperation with Animal Man and the woman known as &quot;Tristess&quot;, she helped to create an entire universe.9
One apparent drawback of Vixen&lt;U+2019&gt;s powers is that she is not always able to control the inputs from the morphogenetic field. Sometimes, she has absorbed unwanted animal behavior, such as instinctive rage. The longer she stays in contact with the morphogenetic field, the less human and more animal she seems to become.10
After being forced to tap into the human template as a matter to purge herself from pure animalistic sensations, Vixen is as now left with a crippled connection with the morphogenetic field, unable to reach any animal except the human animal. However, she can mimic metahumans powers, as Jay Garrick's speed, Geo-Force earth based powers and Black Lightning elemental control. 11

Other media
Lois &amp; Clark: The New Adventures of Superman
In &lt;U+201C&gt;Faster Than a Speeding Vixen,&lt;U+201D&gt; Vixen is an android with super strength, super speed, and the power to fire explosive energy blasts that was created by Lex Luthor&lt;U+2019&gt;s son as part of the first of a plot to break up Lois Lane and Clark Kent. Vixen was played by actress Lori Fetrick. She is portrayed as a corrupt vigilante, and bears very little resemblance to her comic book counterpart.
Justice League Unlimited

Vixen in Justice League Unlimited


Vixen has made numerous appearances on Cartoon Network&lt;U+2019&gt;s Justice League Unlimited animated series. Voiced by Gina Torres, Vixen first appeared on the episode &lt;U+201C&gt;Wake the Dead.&lt;U+201D&gt; Her first scene was on the catwalk and she was later revealed to be Green Lantern&lt;U+2019&gt;s girlfriend, to the jealousy of his former lover Shayera Hol, who still harbored strong and perhaps requited feelings for him.
Though not a regular on the show, Vixen was later featured in &lt;U+201C&gt;Hunter&lt;U+2019&gt;s Moon,&lt;U+201D&gt; where she, along with Vigilante, came to terms with Shayera Hol&lt;U+2019&gt;s actions in the Thanagarian invasion of Earth. They even established a friendship of sorts. In another episode, she and Shayera are teamed up with Black Canary and Huntress in a forced (and unsuccessful) battle royale against the powerhouse Wonder Woman. As the series ended, John Stewart and Vixen were a couple, though the durability of their relationship is called into question by the creators&lt;U+2019&gt; post-show comments and the existence of a future son, Warhawk between Shayera Hol and John Stewart.
On Justice League Unlimited, Vixen is apparently unable to fly, but can adjust her mass to that of larger animals (like an elephant), and land on an opponent with the weight of several tons, while retaining her normal shape.

References

External links

The Unofficial Vixen Biography
Unpublished Vixen #1 from Cancelled Comics Cavalcade
Vixen—JLA Watchtower Profile
Vixen—Blacksuperhero.com Profile
Vixen—JLU Profile (World&lt;U+2019&gt;s Finest)
Vixen—JLU Profile (Burning Knights)

See also

African characters in comics

es:Vixen fr:Vixen (comics) pt:Vixen (DC Comics)
Category:Black superheroes Category:Characters introduced in 1981 Category:DC Comics characters who can fly Category:DC Comics characters who can move at superhuman speeds Category:DC Comics characters with superhuman strength Category:DC Comics metahumans Category:DC Comics superheroes Category:Fictional activists Category:Fictional Africans Category:Fictional characters with accelerated healing Category:Fictional environmentalists Category:Fictional immigrants to the United States Category:Fictional models Category:Fictional orphans Category:Fictional shapeshifters Category:Magic users in comics Category:Mythology in comics



JLA Classified #24↩
Flash #46↩
Birds of Prey #71↩
Birds of Prey #73↩
Action Comics #521↩
Hawk and Dove #4-5↩
Animal Man #12↩
Animal Man #44↩
Animal Man #48-50↩
Flash #45↩
Justice Society of America #11↩


