

Shriek If You Know What I Did Last Friday the Thirteenth is a film directed by John Blanchard released directly to video in 2000. Several mid- and late-1990s, early 2000s teen horror movies are parodied, as are the slasher films of the 1970s and 1980s, including the Scream trilogy (1996-2000), Friday the 13th (1980), Halloween (1978), A Nightmare on Elm Street (1985), The Sixth Sense (1999), I Know What You Did Last Summer (1997), The Matrix (1999), and The Blair Witch Project (1999). It is often compared to Scary Movie, a more commercially successful horror spoof from the same year.
Plot summary
Set on Halloween (a reference to the 1970s slasher Halloween). The movie starts with a young woman named &quot;Screw Frombehind&quot; making a call to Moviefone. Another call comes in from a private number, although the caller ID still states that it is from &quot;The Killer.&quot; Screw answers the phone, and the caller says &quot;Hello, Cindy.&quot; However, he has the wrong number and is confused. When Screw asks who the caller is, he says &quot;The Killer.&quot; &quot;The Killer&quot; asks Screw if she likes movies. She replies saying she rented some, giving off the titles of various films which are obviously pornographic. &quot;The Killer&quot; asks if she likes scary movies, then takes offense when Screw asks if he is referring to Spike Lee films. &quot;The Killer&quot; asks Screw to play a game, but Screw blows him off when he asks a math question. &quot;The Killer&quot; is heard falling into water, obviously revealing that he is outside in Screw's pool. Screw hangs up and pulls out a spatula seemingly to defend herself, then starts putting frosting on the big cake that is on the kitchen counter. &quot;The Killer&quot; calls back, making a collect call, asking who buried in Grant's Tomb. &quot;The Killer&quot; pops out of the cake with a knife, wearing a black hooded robe and a hockey mask, and begins chasing Screw around the table repeatedly until the phone rings. The Killer answers it, and then gives it to Screw, who begins gossiping for a bit until &quot;The Killer&quot; becomes impatient. Screw hangs up and &quot;The Killer&quot; chases her outside. Screw is killed when she accidentally runs into a bug zapper.
&quot;The Killer&quot;, frustrated that he didn't kill Screw, takes out a cigarette to smoke. It causes his mask to burst into flames, and he puts it out by putting his face into a birdbath. The fire has caused &quot;The Killer's&quot; hockey mask to melt into the image of the killer from Scream.
The next day, new kid Dawson Deery is enrolling in Bulimia Falls High School, and is immediately bullied by Slab O'Beef (played by Simon Rex). The secretary introduces Dawson to &quot;The Administrator Formerly Known as the Principal&quot; (played by Coolio), who asks Bonner a.k.a. Boner, to show Dawson around the school. Barbara and Martina also come in and introduce themselves to Dawson. There is an awkward sexual attraction between Martina and Dawson.
Martina and the others are discussing Screw's murder. Meanwhile, &quot;The Killer&quot; attempts to strangle a student with dental floss. The student runs away, and &quot;The Killer&quot;, seemingly oblivious to the other students, pulls a knife out of a locker and walks away. The school is safe despite a violent child named &quot;Chucky&quot; (played by Steven Anthony Lawrence), terrorists, and a heavily armed, but clumsy Special Forces unit.
The gang believes that a serial killer is behind Screw's death, because she was &quot;white and popular&quot; like Barbara. They spot a news van outside where they meet Hagitha Utslay (played by Tiffany Amber Thiessen, who immediately fingers Dawson as the killer, going so far as having written a &quot;best selling pop-up book&quot; titled &quot;Dawson is a Murderer&quot;. Dawson, in full boxing gear, knocks Hagitha out with a right hook, to the delight of the gang, and the dismay of Barbara's step-brother, mall security guard Doughy Primesuspekt (played by Tom Arnold), who is investigating the murder due to the fact that the killer's costume was stolen from the mall. Doughy and Hagitha talk for a while, even revealing that they both wear the same black and white boots that worn by &quot;The Killer&quot;. Later, The bell rings for class and the janitor is seen sweeping dead bodies, presumably students who have been trampled by other students, while the hallway clears out.
Martina is in her class, taught by a substitute teacher, &quot;Mrs. Tingle&quot;. As Mrs. Tingle discusses &quot;the persecution of the Jewish people&quot;, the entire class seemingly train sniper rifles on the back of her head. As Martina is cleaning her baseball glove she finds a note from &quot;The Killer&quot; (on The Killer's personal stationery) saying &quot;I no what you did last summer.&quot; After proofreading the note, she has a flashback where her mom reminds her to give her grandmother her laxatives. Martina goes out without doing so, going joyriding with Barbara, Boner, and Slab, who is drinking from a beer bong. They avoid running over a bag lady but hit a deer. The gang disposes of the deer's body at the docks, but Martina spots a sign saying &quot;No Dumping&quot; and remembers that she forgot to give the laxatives to her grandmother. The gang agrees that &quot;This never happened.&quot; After the end of the flashback &quot;The Killer&quot; in full view of the students, attempts to hang Mrs. Tingle.
Boner is thrown into the pool by the swimcoach to demonstrate CPR (performed by two sexy lifeguards) and is being recussitated. Before he gets an erection hence his name, a girl is kidnapped from the back of the class. When he awakes, Boner has a similar flashback after the Killer leaves a note in Boner's speedo after passing out in swimming class saying &quot;I Know What you did last semester.&quot; In his flashback, Boner's older brother Jimmy, who is on death row, gives Boner a letter to mail in the governor or else he'll be put to death by electric chair in two weeks. Two weeks later, Boner, Martina, Slab, and Barbara go joyriding again. In Boner's flashback, Barbara and Martina are enamoured with Boner. They hit a deer, just like in Martina's flashback, and dispose of it at the docks. Boner spots a mailbox, and remembers that he never mailed Jimmy's letter, because he was using it as a bookmark for a Penthouse magazine. They all agree that &quot;this never happened&quot;.
In the hall, everything is normal until the killer kidnaps another girl and drags her into a locker. Slab finds a letter in his locker, and finds a letter saying &quot;I know what you did last Chanakuh&quot;, a word which Slab cannot pronounce. In Slab's flashback, the gang is joyriding, and Slab is driving drunk. However, he is a British intellectual drinking a highball. They hit the deer, like in the past flashbacks. As they are disposing of the deer at the docks, Slab spots a sign saying &quot;No Smoking&quot; and remembers that he smoked his uncle's ashes. They then agree that &quot;this never happened&quot;.
Barbara goes to see Nurse Kevorkian, the school nurse/funeral director, who tells Barbara that she has chlamydia, gonorrhea, syphilis, crabs, and herpes. She shows off an x-ray which reveals a note which Barbara had in her pocket, saying &quot;I know what you did last period&quot;. Barbara has a flashback, in which she tears the tag off of a mattress while having sex. She later goes joyriding, like in the other flashbacks. In Barbara's flashback, the gang sucks up to her. They hit the deer, and dispose of it at the docks, where Barbara reads the tag which says &quot;Under penalty of law, this tag not be removed&quot;. Barbara and the others then agree that &quot;this never happened&quot;
The gang eats lunch later, and they suspect Dawson to be the killer, as he's the only one who didn't get a note. Then he finds an envelope from &quot;The Killer&quot; in his burger. Dawson has a vision where a man in a cabin has forced him to put on a deer suit and eat salt lick. The man passes out from being drunk, and Dawson escapes. The cabin explodes when the unconscious man farts toward the fireplace. Dawson is then run down by Slab, Barbara, Boner, and Martina, who take him to the docks and throw him in the water, agreeing that &quot;this never happened&quot;
The gang agrees that the only way to escape the killer is to hide someplace safe, &quot;in the middle of nowhere&quot;, &quot;in the dark woods and pouring rain&quot;, and &quot;without any adult supervision or police protection anywhere in the the near vicinity.&quot; They agree to hide out at Slab's house. They all leave the lunch table with signs on their back.
The hallway clears and all of the students go to class except Barbara, who goes to the restroom, where she is attacked by the killer. A hilarious Mentos parody ensues and Barbara escapes.
In auto shop class, Slab is ridiculed by the other students for doing the &quot;Greased Lightning&quot; dance, and is also attacked by &quot;The Killer&quot; who almost runs him down, except that for some reason, the footage of the killer driving is stuck in a loop. &quot;The Killer&quot; is then pulled over by a cop. Slab walks away in shame, having pissed his pants.
Martina is running track, and &quot;The Killer&quot; begins chasing her. Eventually &quot;The Killer&quot; is racing with Martina. &quot;The Killer&quot; wins the race and celebrates his victory. He doesn't notice that Martina has gotten away until the crowd has lifted him above their shoulders in celebration.
Boner is attempting to peek at girls in the shower, but instead gets a glimpse of &quot;The Killer&quot; who attempts to stab him through the peephole that Boner has drilled.
Dawson has managed to enroll in sex ed. As he is preparing the projector so the class can watch the Pamela Anderson/Tommy Lee sex tape, he is attacked by &quot;The Killer&quot;. Dawson grabs a rock to defend himself. &quot;The Killer&quot;, playing rock paper scissors, grabs a piece of paper, which Dawson cuts with a pair of scissors. &quot;The Killer&quot; smashes an emergency box to grab a bottle of Jack Daniels. Dawson then grabs a gun which he also smashes. The Killer manages to ground and pound Dawson, until he slips away.
The Killer's costume is laid out in a room, and The Administrator Formerly Known as the Principal is apparently playing sex games with Resusci-Annie, a CPR dummy. They lay in a jacuzzi and begin spying on the students. Unruly students begin throwing objects through the window. &quot;The Killer&quot; shows up and prepares to fight The Administrator Formerly Known as the Principal with a pair of Sock'em Boppers, but the AFKATP gets hit by a frying pan and falls into the jacuzzi and gets electrocuted to death.
That night, the students of Bulimia Falls have a party at Slab's house, while Doughy, Hagitha, and her cameraman have a stakeout, which involves looking at the stars, playing the drums, and playing strip poker. After Martina explains the rules of a parody, after which Boner seemingly dies. Barbara goes into the garage, and a hilarious parody of the garage scene in Scream ensues. Barbara attempts to escape through the garage door, but gets stuck. After pressing buttons that ring the doorbell, and activate a disco ball, &quot;The Killer&quot; manages to raise the garage door, which goes back down and up repeatedly. Barbara manages to escape by removing her breast implants but is killed after being stung by bees.
The other kids decide to leave the party after hearing that The AFKATP was killed and try to get to the corpse before the coroner so they can play Weekend at Bernie's with it. Slab also leaves the room, and Martina begins to seduce Dawson, even using Nurse Kevorkian's &quot;safe sex kit&quot;. They then discover Slab in the bathroom, injecting steroids, and then his head explodes. &quot;The Killer&quot; then comes after them and a Pop-Up Video/Scooby-Doo style chase scene ensues.
Martina and Dawson run back into the house, where &quot;The Killer&quot; catches up to them. Dawson attempt to fight &quot;The Killer&quot;, but is ridiculously outmatched. Martina however easily dispatches &quot;The Killer&quot; while Dawson cheers her on. They begin unmasking &quot;The Killer&quot; going through multiple masks. Doughy and Hagitha, hearing the sound effect thay plays as each mask is removed, go to investigate.
Eventually the serial killer is revealed to be the evil twin cousin of the mall security officer investigating the case and is promptly killed. The film ends with the punkish girl and the new kid getting together, the nerd losing his virginity (albeit to a male-female transsexual), and a new serial killer, in the same costume, is targeting high school teenagers.
The film seems to promises a sequel, but none is planned.
Parodies


Scream- The killer in the film is identical to Ghostface as well as there being numerous scenes taken from it.
I Know What You Did Last Summer- The gang all receive notes and have flashbacks relating to the main plot line of the film.
Halloween- The film is set over the course of Halloween, which is an obvious reference to the film and its setting.
Friday the 13th Series- The beginning of the moive features the killer wearing Jason Voorhees' trademark hockey mask.
Baywatch- When Bonner is in swimming class two lifeguards attempt to save him from drowining in a &quot;Baywatch style&quot;.
Dawson's Creek- The character Dawson, is taken from the show.
A Nightmare on Elm Street- The gang mention running away and hiding in a boiler room, similar to the one in which the infamous Freddy Krueger was killed.
Titanic'''

The rules
At the climactic party scene, Martina breaks the fourth wall by explaining that they are in a parody situation. Much like in Scream, Martina begins to explain the rules of a parody situation. Those rules are:

Exaggerate everything.
Accept that the ridiculous is logical.
Sexual sight gags are always funny (especially with wacky sound effects)
Unlimited absurdity
Nothing is sacred (At this point, &quot;The Killer&quot; knocks down a cross off of a wall, killing a drunk girl who is passed out on the bed.)
Point out the obvious
Perpetuate painful stereotypes.
You can't have a successful parody without mocking contrived, confusing endings.

Cast

Barbara Primesuspekt: She's the &quot;dumb, slutty blonde&quot; stereotype. At the film's end, it is revealed that she is infected with various STDs (that she &quot;blames&quot; on Starbucks toilet seats) and that she is a lesbian. Dies from multiple allergic bee stings. She was molested by her gym teacher. Played by Julie Benz.

What the Killer had on Her: During her last period she ripped the tag off of her mattress.



Dawson Deary: The new kid and the handsome hero. His name is an obvious reference to Dawson Leery, the major character in the television series Dawson's Creek. His family was hacked to bits while he was at camp. Played by Harley Cross.

What the Killer Had on Him: Last Arbor Day he performed pornographic acts with an inbred mountain man while dressed in a deer suit and eating salt lick before getting run down by the others and dumped in the sea.



Martina Martinez: She's the punk girl who looks like Willow from Buffy The Vampire Slayer. While the film hints that she is a lesbian, she turns out to be a witch. Played by Majandra Delfino.

What the Killer had on Her: Last summer, she forgot to give her grandmother her laxatives.



Slab O'Beef: He's the dumb, illiterate jock and is addicted to steroids. Dies when his head explodes from an overdose. Played by Simon Rex.

What the Killer Had on Him: Last Chanukah he smoked his uncle's ashes.



Bonner &quot;Boner&quot;: The neurotic Jewish guy that is constantly trying to lose his virginity a la American Pie. He had a heart attack near the end after overdosing on Viagra, but his blood kept pumping. People constantly call him Boner. Played by Danny Strong.

What the Killer Had on Him: Last semester he forgot to mail a letter to the governor that would save his imprisoned brother from the electric chair.



Principal Interest or The Administrator-Formerely-Known-As-Principal, he's a reference to the artist Prince. Dies after being electrocuted in a hot tub with a sex doll. Played by Coolio.


Screw Frombehind: She's the first victim after she runs into a bug zapper. Her name is a reference to Drew Barrymore, who played the first victim in Scream. Played by Aimee Graham.


Hagitha 'Hag' Utslay: Hagitha is a TV anchorwoman from &quot;EMP-TV&quot; and wrote the book &quot;Dawson is a Killer&quot;, which wrongfully describes Dawson as killing kids at his camp in the form of a pop-up book. She goes through multiple camermen since they're all killed in the background by the Killer, or by her. Her last name, Utslay, is Pig Latin for slut. Played by Tiffani Thiessen.


Deputy Doughy Primesuspekt: The bungling deputy. He's made fun of most of the time and given such names as Captain Caldors, Sergeant Sears, NYKiddy Gap, and Food Court Police. Played by Tom Arnold.


Harding: Doughy's &quot;evil twin cousin&quot;. He was revealed to be the killer. He drew a mustache on his face to distinguish himself from Doughy.


Nurse Kevorkian: She's the &quot;School Nurse/Funeral Director&quot; and likes to hand out old suitcases as &quot;Safe Sex&quot; kits. She tells long stories about her own sexual history which has been described as a &quot;dirty, filthy spank-fest in a bus station restroom shared by two anonymous consenting adults on a layover in Detroit and no one ever need know!&quot; Played by Shirley Jones.


Mrs Tingle: A substitute teacher who delivers lectures tying the Holocaust with Frankenstein. The entire class seems to hate her so much that they all attempt to snipe her. The name is clearly a direct parody on the titular teacher in the film Teaching Mrs. Tingle. Played by Rose Marie.


Mr. Lowelle: Played by David Herman.

Trivia


Was filmed under the working title &quot;I Know What You Screamed Last Semester&quot;.
Julie Benz plays Sarah Michelle Gellar's character from I Know What You Did Last Summer (1997). In Buffy the Vampire Slayer (1997), Gellar plays Buffy... a role for which Julie Benz auditioned.
Danny Strong and Julie Benz both appeared as villains in &quot;Buffy the Vampire Slayer&quot;, as Jonathan and Darla, respectively.
Shot at the same school as Jawbreaker (1999),which Julia Benz appeared in.
Principal Interest refers to the previous principal as Mr Winkler. Henry Winkler played Principal Himbry in Scream (1996)
While the film was originally intended to have a theatrical release, because of the big similarities with Scary Movie (2000) and the popularity of that previous film it was decided to release it direct-to-video.
In France the movie is called Scary Scream Movie.

External links



A site featuring brief explanations regarding roles of the featured characters
Film Critic Review

fr:Scary Scream Movie nl:Shriek If You Know What I Did Last Friday the Thirteenth
Category:Parody films Category:2000 films Category:American films Category:Comedy horror films Category:English-language films
