
Howards Alias are a popular band in the modern UK underground punk scene. They formed in 1999 in Southampton, England and blend an eclectic mix of rock, progressive, punk and ska influences into their own musical output.
The band have released three full-length albums. The first - The Chameleon Script - was released by Good Clean Fun Records in 2002, with the sophomore and third albums being released on the Household Name Records label in 2004 and 2005 respectively. During their career, Howards Alias have also released a split EP with friends DESA and contributed to several international punk compilation CDs.
Biography
 Howards Alias began at the end of 1999, writing songs mostly in the ska-punk vein. Even by the time that The Chameleon Script was released in 2002, it became apparent that the band's sound was somewhat more mature and defined than the usual third wave sound that had been overdone in previous years. The album was critically acclaimed;12 even by notorious UK rock weekly Kerrang!, who awarded it four &quot;K&quot;s out of five.
The band continued to tour hard with bands such as Lightyear, Captain Everything!, No Comply, Sonic Boom Six, DESA and Rx Bandits (who are generally acknowledged as a major influence in later Howards Alias work).
In early 2004, the band wrote three new songs for inclusion on a split EP with DESA. The EP showed a change of direction from The Chameleon Script, with the band dropping a lot of the predominant ska influences. This showed a transition that the band cemented with the release of The Answer Is Never later in the same year. The album was hailed by critics as &quot;a masterpiece&quot; and &quot;one of the best British rock records ever made&quot;, with EuroPunk.net firmly stating &quot;If you claim to love music, you owe it to yourself to own this record, simply as that&quot;.3  Longtime drummer Jevon Snell left the band in early 2005 (soon to join another Southampton-based band: Chin Music), and was replaced by Jon Warren of Workin Lunch. The band went into the studio with this new line-up to record the follow-up to The Answer Is Never. The result was Beat Heart, Beat, which was released in the July of 2005.
Less of a drastic step and more of a natural progression from the previous album, the critical reception of the album was mostly positive. The inclusion of a keyboard (played by the multi-talented Nicholas Horne) was particularly praised for adding a new depth to the Howards Alias sound.4 Some older fans, however, were alienated by the step even further away from the original ska-punk roots of the band.
Split
With extensive touring taking its toll on inter-band friendships, bassist Stevie and drummer Jon both left the band after a tour to support the release of Beat Heart, Beat. Guitarist and vocalist Matthew Reynolds left a message on the band's website and MySpace informing fans that the band would split up after a final tour. Peter Miles - producer of The Answer Is Never and Beat Heart, Beat - was recruited to play bass, and friend Lloyd Williams took drum duties.
Matthew Reynolds spoke in an interview with PunkNews.co.uk, regarding the reasons behind the split:
&quot;''I think, like; circumstance, basically. We haven't had an interview yet asking us that so it's kind of a bit weird. I think basically we've been touring for a long time and have played a lot of shows. I don't want to sound like I'm whining, cos' it's nothing like that. We've always been a bit unlucky as far as money is concerned. We're not the best people in the world at handling money. Also, there's not a lot of money to be earned playing to little crowds across the country all the time. We don't have a lot of money and that kind of put pressure on the band, I think, and the tour in July lasted about thirty-something days. It was kind of like we were in a time bomb waiting to happen. It kind of built until the point where we felt we weren't getting on because of the circumstances we were in. No-one was happy, none of us had any stability in life. We'd tour, and that's really fun; but then we'd go home. Not so much me and Nick, but Jon and Steve really felt that they didn't really have any stability at home. Neither of them had a place to live, so they were sleeping on mates' floors and things like that. They couldn't afford to buy food a lot of the time. After a while it kind of got to them both. It got to me as well - I'm not trying to, like, pass the buck, if that's what it sounds like. It was all of us equally, it was kind of like... building up.
''We decided at the end of the tour we'd take some time off and we got together a month or so later and talked about it. We then decided it would be the best thing for all of us just to call it a day really.5
Howards Alias split up in October 2005, with a final hometown show at The Nexus club in Southampton, UK.
Thinkpol
 In January of 2006, Matthew Reynolds revealed plans of a new musical outlet - Thinkpol. Named after the Thought Police of George Orwell's novel Nineteen Eighty-Four, the band had a more straightforward and accessible rock sound than Howards Alias. The band originally consisted of Matthew Reynolds, brother Andrew Reynolds, Peter Miles and Robert King. Peter Miles left the band and was replaced by Nicholas Horne, fresh from his short stint playing bass guitar in NoComply.
Thinkpol released two demo CDs with three songs on each, although many more were written for inclusion on their planned debut album. Whether or not any of these will resurface as Howards Alias songs is currently unknown.
Reformation
On September 25 2006, the following message appeared on Thinkpol's MySpace:
''Hello good people of the world.
''Thinkpol are no longer a band.
For future reference go to www.myspace.com/howardsalias
This was followed by news of a December tour and fourth album to follow in 2007, much to the delight of Howards Alias fans everywhere. The current incarnation of the band includes Matthew Roberts - formerly of NoComply - on saxophone.
Skylar
Skylar is the reggae/traditional ska side-project of four members of the underground UK band Howards Alias. Their original drummer - Jon Warren - was also formerly a member of Howards Alias. The band was formed in March 2004 as an outlet for &quot;Matt to use material he was writing that wasn't suitable for the other band he plays in.&quot; To this end, all Skylar songs and lyrics are written by Matthew Reynolds.
The band have released an eponymous debut album, recorded in only eleven hours by Peter Miles. It was self-released in a plastic sleeve with a basic photocopied cover, available from Howards Alias gigs and the band's official website, before being remixed and re-released with new cover art and an additional two songs by Do The Dog Music in April 2006.
On December 4th 2006, Skylar supported the seminal modern reggae outfit Easy Star All-Stars at The Brook in Southampton, UK. Skylar have also been making progress on their sophomore album.
Members

Matthew Reynolds &lt;U+2013&gt; Guitar, vocals - See also: Skylar, Thinkpol
Nicholas Edward 'The Blade' Horne &lt;U+2013&gt; Trombone, keyboard, trumpet and backing vocals - See also: Skylar, NoComply, Thinkpol
Peter Miles - Bass guitar, backing vocals - See also: Identity #1, The Leftbehinds, Skylar, Thinkpol
Matthew Roberts - Saxophone - See also: NoComply
Robert King - Drums - See also: Thinkpol, Skylar

Former Members

Christopher Murphy (1999-2002) - Bass guitar
Rob Griffin (1999-2003) - Trumpet
Stevie McCusker (2002-2005) - Bass guitar
Jevon Snell (2001-2005) - Drums See also: Chin Music
Jon Warren (2005) - Drums See also: Workin Lunch, Skylar
Lloyd Williams (2005) - Drums

Discography
Albums

The Chameleon Script (Good Clean Fun Records, 2002)
The Answer Is Never (Household Name Records, 2004)
Beat Heart, Beat (Household Name Records, 2005)

EPs

Howards Alias (Self-Released, 2000)
Howards Alias vs. Identity #1 (with Identity #1) (Self-Released, 2001)
The Split E.P. (with DESA) (Good Clean Fun Records, 2004)

External links

Official Howards Alias MySpace

Notes

Category:English musical groups Category:Third-wave ska groups Category:UK Underground Punk Scene Category:Musical groups established in 1999 Category:2005 disestablishments



Savage, Paul: &quot;The Chameleon Script, Howards Alias&quot; www.punktastic.com↩
Adriany, Tom: &quot;Howards Alias - The Chameleon Script&quot; www.europunk.net↩
Adriany, Tom: &quot;Howards Alias - The Answer Is Never&quot; www.europunk.net↩
http://www.sputnikmusic.com/album.php?albumid=4044↩
http://www.punknews.co.uk/article.php?filter=interview&amp;view=view&amp;id=139↩


