 Fanny Jackson Coppin (October 15, 1837 - January 21, 1913) was an African American educator and missionary. Born an American slave, Fanny Jackson's freedom was purchased by her aunt at age 12. Fanny Jackson spent the rest of her youth working as a servant for author George Henry Calvert, studying at every opportunity. In 1860, she enrolled in Oberlin College in Ohio, the first college in the United States to accept both black and female students. During her years as a student at Oberlin College, she taught an evening course for free slaves in reading and writing, and she graduated with a Bachelor's degree in 1865.
In 1865, Fanny Jackson accepted a position at Philadelphia's Institute for Colored Youth (now Cheyney University of Pennsylvania). She served as the principal of the Ladies Department and taught Greek, Latin, and Mathematics. In 1869, Fanny Jackson was appointed as the principal of the Institute after the departure of Ebenezer Bassett, becoming the first African American woman to become a school principal. In her 37 years at the Institute, Fanny Jackson was responsible for vast educational improvements in Philadelphia.
On December 21, 1881, Fanny married Reverend Levi Jenkins Coppin, a minister of the African Methodist Episcopal Church. Fanny Jackson Coppin started to become very involved with her husband's missionary work, and in 1902 the couple went to South Africa and performed a variety of missionary work, including the founding of the Bethel Institute, a missionary school with self-help programs.
After almost a decade of missionary work, Fanny Jackson Coppin's declining health forced her to return to Philadelphia, and she died on January 21, 1913. In 1926, a Baltimore teacher training school was named the Fanny Jackson Coppin Normal School (now Coppin State University).
External links

Online version of Reminiscences of School Life, and Hints on Teaching, a book by Fanny Jackson Coppin

References


(an Essortment article)

Coppin, Fanny Jackson Copping, Fanny Jackson Coppin, Fanny Jackson Coppin, Fanny Jackson Coppin, Fanny Jackson Coppin, Fanny Jackson Coppin, Fanny Jackson
