

Walter John &quot;Wally&quot; Downes (born 9 June 1961) is an English former football player and manager. He is also a currently a first team coach at Southampton.
He is related to the boxer Terry Downes.
Playing career
Downes started out as an apprentice with Wimbledon and was one of the instigators of the Crazy Gang spirit at the club as it rose from the Fourth to the First Division inside a decade. He made over 200 league appearances for Wimbledon.
Managerial career
Crystal Palace
Forced to retire through injury, Downes took a coaching position at Crystal Palace, and spent 12 years at Selhurst Park, most of these under Steve Coppell.
Brentford
Downes left Palace in 2000, following Coppell (who had left Palace following a takeover) to Brentford, where he became assistant manager. When Coppell left Brentford in June 2002, Downes was appointed manager. He led the club to a mid-table finish in the Second Division in 2002-03, but was sacked in March 2004 with the club near the bottom of the table and facing relegation.
Reading
Downes then once again rejoined Coppell, this time at Reading, initially on a casual basis, but quickly proved himself invaluable, and took on the job of coaching Reading's defence. As a result, Downes was a major reason for Reading's impressive defensive display in the 2005-06 Championship season, where Reading had the best defensive statistics in the entire English football pyramid, and were promoted to the Premier League with a record 106 points.
In January 2007, Downes was involved in a touchline scuffle with Sheffield United manager Neil Warnock after he accused Warnock of telling his players to 'break legs'. However Warnock said: &quot;I made the kicking gesture to tell the referee that Steve Sidwell's tackle on Chris Armstrong had been the worst of the game. Fortunately for me, the referee heard exactly what was said and confirmed that.&quot; Downes has been charged with improper conduct for his role in the affray.1 The incident inspired Reading fans to start a chant for the enigmatic coach, saying &quot;Wally Downes is magic, he wears his magic hat, and when he saw Neil Warnock he punched that f**king tw*t!&quot;. This chant has become popular for the fans of the Berkshire-based club whenever they play teams managed by the unpopular Warnock, particularily due to his teams negative physical method of play.
On 14 May 2009, the club announced that they wouldn't renew his and Kevin Dillon's contract after Reading failed to bounce back to the Premier League at the first attempt after getting knocked out of the Play Offs by Burnley 3-0 on aggregate and the departure of Steve Coppell. This was officially announced on the day of Steve Coppell's Press Conference and was first seen in an article in the Daily Mail saying he has been &quot;sacked&quot;.
Southampton
On 7 September 2009, Downes was appointed to a position within the backroom staff of League 1 club, Southampton.
External links


Wally Downes profile at the League Managers Association web site



Category:1961 births Category:Living people Category:Old Danes Category:English footballers Category:Wimbledon F.C. players Category:English football managers Category:UEFA Pro Licence holders Category:Brentford F.C. managers Category:Reading F.C. non-playing staff
