
La Martini&lt;U+00E8&gt;re College is a private secondary school located in Lucknow in the state of Uttar Pradesh in India. It is one of three schools of the same name founded in the nineteenth century by the French adventurer Major General Claude Martin. La Martini&lt;U+00E8&gt;re Lucknow consists of two schools on different campuses for boys and girls. La Martini&lt;U+00E8&gt;re Boys' College was founded in 1845 and La Martini&lt;U+00E8&gt;re Girls' College was established in 1869. La Martini&lt;U+00E8&gt;re Boys' College is the only school in the world to be awarded the Battle Honours. The motto of the school is Labore et Constantia.
History
 La Martini&lt;U+00E8&gt;re Boys' College is based in Constantia House, the former country residence of the wealthy eighteenth-century French adventurer Major General Claude Martin (1735-1800). Martin acquired his large fortune while serving Asaf-ud-Daula, the nawab wazir of Awadh. The house is believed to have been named after Martin's first love, a young French girl called Constance.1 Martin died on 13 September 1800. In his will dated 1 January 1800 he left substantial funds for the establishment of schools at Lyon, his birth place in France, in Calcutta and at Lucknow. The residue of his estate after certain bequests had been made was to be used for the maintenance of these schools. He directed that the school in Lucknow should be established at Constantia and that the house should be kept as a &quot;school or College for learning young men the English language and Christian religion if they found themselves inclined&quot;.2 After Martin's death there were protracted disputes in the Calcutta High Court and consequently his will was not proved until 1840. In the interim the Constantia building was used as a guest house for visiting Europeans. The school finally opened on 1st October 1845 with some seventy boys on roll. The first Principal was John Newmarch.3
Very little is known about the early years of the College. Existing records show that over 120 boys qualified for admission to the higher department of the Civil Engineering College at Roorkee in 1865. By 1900 the choir was being transported to and from church services at Christ Church Hazratgung in horse driven buses. On Founder&lt;U+2019&gt;s Day the choir had to don Eton jackets and broad school ties reserved for such occasions. 1947 saw a change made in the curriculum by the dropping of Urdu as a compulsory subject and its replacement by Hindi.
The Main Building
La Martini&lt;U+00E8&gt;re Boys' College occupies the central portion of the Constantia building which is constructed in an unusual mixture of styles. The building stands on a landscaped terrace overlooking what was once a lake, from the centre of which rises a solid fluted column with a Moorish cupola known as 'the Laat'. It is about forty metres (~ 125-feet high). Over the years, the Gomti River has edged closer, necessitating the building of a river bund between the front terrace and &lt;U+2018&gt;the Laat&lt;U+2019&gt;. In 1960, the grounds were flooded and the 1803 and 1934 earthquakes caused several statues to fall from their pedestals where they crown the architecture. The statues are in modern and older antique styles.
The rooms in the main building are decorated in bas reliefs, arabesques and other Italian styled ornamentation. The eighteenth-century english potter Josiah Wedgewood was said to be responsible for the plaster of Paris plaques decorating the library and the chapel. However, the plaques which depict classical and mythological subjects are thought to be of local construction. Orders for tons of imported Plaster of Paris were discovered in Martin&lt;U+2019&gt;s letters4, it is believed that they are in fact based on just one or two original models. What was imported was the large mirrors, French carpets, inlaid marble5 tables and paintings including some by Johann Zoffany who was a friend of Claude Martin.6 The building has been described as, &quot;part Enlightenment mansion, part Nawabi fantasy, and part Gothic colonial barracks. Its facade mixes Georgian colonnades with the loopholes and turrets of a mediaeval castle; above, Palladian arcades rise to Mughal copulas.&quot;7
The school in film
In later years the College has been the setting for a number of films including:

Gadar: Ek Prem Katha - a 2001 Bollywood movie starring Sunny Deol, Amisha Patel, and Amrish Puri.
Kim, a 1950s MGM adventure film starring Errol Flynn, Dean Stockwell (as Kim), Paul Lukas and Robert Douglas.
Shakespeare Wallah, the 1965 Merchant Ivory Productions film loosely based on the real-life adventures of Felicity Kendal's family.
Shatranj Ke Khiladi (The Chess Players), the 1977 film by Satyajit Ray.8
Stones Of The Raj: The French Connection, a 1997 documentary for Channel 4 television by William Dalrymple.9

The school in literature
Rudyard Kipling's 1901 novel Kim tells of the adventures of Kimball O'Hara, the orphaned son of a British soldier. Kim is given the chance to go to St Xavier's School in Lucknow, the most prestigious school in British India. St Xavier's is a fictional creation but Kipling authorities believe that the school is modelled on La Martini&lt;U+00E8&gt;re.10
The Indian writer Allan Sealy, a former pupil of the school, set his first novel Trotter-nama in the old house, which he renamed as Sans Souci (carefree). The school has also featured in several short stories.11
The school's role in India&lt;U+2019&gt;s First War of Independence
 The Indian Mutiny of 1857 or India&lt;U+2019&gt;s First War of Independence saw the making of the Martinian military legend. For the first time in history, Britain called on schoolboys to assist in the military conflict - namely the defence of the Lucknow Residency. The names of eight staff members, sixty seven boys and one ensign (old boy) are inscribed on the 'Roll of Honour, defence of the Residency 1857' at La Martini&lt;U+00E8&gt;re Lucknow. The siege began on the 30 June 1857. Early in June, the Chief Commissioner of Oudh, Sir Henry Lawrence ordered the Martini&lt;U+00E8&gt;re be evacuated and for several days the boys travelled from the Residency to the College collecting provisions. The force within the Residency then consisted of British and Indian troops and civilian volunteers including a number of Anglo-Indians. The Martini&lt;U+00E8&gt;re contingent was commanded by the Principal, Mr. George Schilling. The Residency was under siege for eighty-six days, until relieved by Sir Colin Campbell in November 185712.
The role of the boys and masters of La Martini&lt;U+00E8&gt;re has been well documented in Chandan Mitra's 1987 book titled Constant Glory - La Martini&lt;U+00E8&gt;re saga 1836-1986.13 The Residency fortifications and defended houses were about a mile in circumference, and the Martini&lt;U+00E8&gt;re contingent, along with a detachment of the 32nd Regiment of Foot, were garrisoned in a strongly built house containing tykhanas (cellars) and adjoining outhouses. The position became known as The Martini&lt;U+00E8&gt;re Post and was a mere thirty feet distant from Johannes House, held by the rebels, and as a consequence, was exposed to heavy shelling.
Apart from actual fighting, the boys performed a number of useful tasks within the Residency compound. Some ran messages to the hospital, watched over the sick and wounded, ground corn and manned the telegraph connecting the Residency to Alam Bagh; others were seconded to domestic duties in place of native servants who had absconded. The boys proved willing helpers and despite the many dangers, their casualties were surprisingly few. Two died of dysentery and two others were wounded in action. Their diet consisted of mutton and buffalo-head soup. On another occasion, a mine blew down the outer room of The Martini&lt;U+00E8&gt;re Post, but the boys bravely defended the breach and after several days of bitter fighting managed to drive off the enemy housed opposite their camp.
Major Gorman in his Great Exploits - The Siege of Lucknow wrote that the Martini&lt;U+00E8&gt;re boys erected an amateur semaphore on the Residency tower from instructions given in a number of the Penny Encyclopaedia14. The semaphore enabled General Outram to advise the commander of the relieving force Sir Colin Campbell &lt;U+2018&gt;to give the city a wide berth&lt;U+2019&gt;, avoiding the heavy enemy batteries on the direct road to the Residency. The fiercest fighting of the advance that followed was at the Martini&lt;U+00E8&gt;re College, strongly defended by the mutineers. Sir Colin dislodged them, occupied the college, setting up another semaphore on its roof to communicate with Outram. The Martini&lt;U+00E8&gt;re contingent took part in the secret evacuation of the Residency, and the rambling journey of six weeks across India which followed, until finally arriving by boat at Benares, where the College was again established in bungalows and the school routine recommenced.
Rewards and Battle Honours
Principal Schilling&lt;U+2019&gt;s leadership was well rewarded. He became a taluqdar, or noble of Oudh, with an estate worth 30,000 pounds, thereby ensuring a comfortable retirement in England. The Martini&lt;U+00E8&gt;re contribution was officially recognised in Queen Victoria&lt;U+2019&gt;s (1858) proclamation. Although the boys were all awarded the Indian Mutiny Medal,15 it was not until 1932 , following a request by the College, that the British Government recognised Martini&lt;U+00E8&gt;re's role in 1857. The school was presented with Battle Honours - an honour held by no other educational institution in the British Empire. Bishop Cotton, made the following reference to the Martini&lt;U+00E8&gt;re action at St. Paul's Cathedral, Calcutta on 28 July 1860:

Public thanksgiving to Almighty God for deliverance from the sepoy revolt should take expression in the form of schools for the children of the Community that had stood so nobly by England in her hour of need and which shed its blood for kinsmen across the seas.

The battle honours were represented by a flag that has &quot;Defence of Lucknow&quot; written across it. The flag has not been displayed publically since 1947 as the subject caused some ambivalence. Satish Bhatnagar, author of Bright Renown: La Martiniere College Lucknow comments: &quot;I once asked the principal why the school is hiding the honour. He said he didn't know how the Indian government would take it.&quot;16
1997 murder
In March 1997 tragedy struck the college. The Martinian community in India and overseas was shocked and saddened to learn of the murder within the college premises of 30-year-old Frederick Gomes, Assistant warden and physical training instructor at the College. This is perhaps the first time since the Great Mutiny of 1857 that the portals of Constantia has been mute witness to such violence which took place on March 7 1997. The two figures who fired the shots were not identified and the murder remains unsolved, but it created a sensation at the time as it was found that the school's students had access to guns17. A former student was quoted, &quot;The killing is a metaphor of our times. For such a level of violence to reach the sacred precincts of La Martiniere is symbolic of the way that Lucknow, like so much of India, has completely ceased to be what it once was.&quot;18
Curriculum
The College has been recognised for its educational and sporting standards. The curriculum today includes Mathematics, both English Language and Literature, History and Civics, Geography, Principles of Accounts, Commercial Studies, Science, Art, Craft &amp; Woodwork, Choral Singing, Hindi, Sanskrit (up to Class VIII), and Computer Studies.
Class 10 students are prepared for the Indian Certificate of Secondary Education and for the Indian School Certificate Examination when they are in Class 12.
The College offers all traditional sports as well as swimming (there are two swimming pools and a gymnasium). Five boys were selected in 1960 to represent Uttar Pradesh at the XVIII National Aquatic Championships held in Delhi; namely C.Doutre, P. Keenan, H.S. Dhillon, C.Ward, and R. Sharpe. They all made the finals of their events.
Altrnative views have been made of the curriculum. William Dalrymle was told by &quot;one old boy&quot; that after India achieved independance &quot;&quot;The curriculum didn't change, the food didn't change, the games didn't change. Diwali continued to be celebrated as Guy Fawkes Day. They kept the Union Jack flying from the roof well into the mid-Sixties.&quot;19 Dalrymple found that sudents understood English culture and history, but they had less appreciation of local poets and Indian history.20
Physical and Military Training
The College has a Senior Division National Cadet Corps (Rifles) Troop, and two troops of the junior Division (Naval and Air Wings), representing the three Defence Services. Younger boys belong to the School Scout Troop and Cub Pack. In 1960, there was extensive flooding of the grounds by the Gomti River resulting in the evacuation of staff and boys to higher ground. The dingy, manned by N.C.C., staff and boys, maintained regular contact with the outside world and the staff still provided classes and meals for the students.
School Houses
La Martini&lt;U+00E8&gt;re Lucknow has four houses which were first given their names in 1913:

Lyons (Yellow) - after the birthplace of the founder - Lyon, France
Cornwallis (Green) - named after Lord Cornwallis
Hodson (Red) named after Major William Hodson
Martin (Blue) - after the founder's name Major general Claude Martin

Notable teachers
Throughout its history, the College has been served by generations of dedicated and outstanding teachers and servants. A couple of examples were Colonel William Edgar Andrews and Biology teacher Mr. R.D. Vidhiyarti. Colonel Andrews was Principal at the College from 1926-to 1951. He was the ninth Principal in a line of succession from John Newmarch. He came out to India in 1914 as Senior history and geography master in La Martini&lt;U+00E8&gt;re Calcutta. Then in 1921 he was appointed Headmaster of Boys' High School &amp; College, Allahabad where he proved a great asset. In 1926 he was appointed Principal of Lucknow Martini&lt;U+00E8&gt;re. The Colonel&lt;U+2019&gt;s period of office saw many changes and improvements to the College, including the construction of the modern well-equipped Spence and Sykes halls. Other milestones were the opening of the Biology department, the introduction of the School song, and the award of Battle Honours. More than 38 years of the Colonel&lt;U+2019&gt;s life was devoted to educating the young and his career was characterised by dedication, tolerance and understanding. On 14 January 1979 retired Biology master Vidhiyarti died at his Lucknow residence. 'Vidhi' as he was affectionately known to generations of Martinians, served the College from 9 January 1945 till his retirement on 31 December 1973. He started the Biology Department in the College and was House Master of Hodson House for many years. Apart from his long and devoted service to the College, 'Vidhi' was a successful author of Biology books, some of which were standard texts in Uttar Pradesh. The torch of learning has been carried on by a number of Old Boys who today are Principals of leading schools in India. Terence Phillips in Wynberg Allen School (Mussoorie); Cedric Innes in Boys High School (Allahabad), Roy Robinson (Bishop Cotton School, Shimla), Allan Baker in Barnes (Devlali) and Munday Martin in St. Thomas's (Calcutta ) to name a few.
Notable alumni
Martinians have left their mark in many spheres of life. One of India&lt;U+2019&gt;s foremost irrigation engineers in the earlier part of this century was named Joseph Smith. Joseph, who passed out of the Lucknow Martini&lt;U+00E8&gt;re in 1894, led a distinguished career in civil engineering. He worked on leading canal projects of the day and his dedication and expertise earned him a knighthood in 1932.
Another old Martinian named Hubert Bolst left his mark in a different way. He left the Boys' College around 1889 and worked for the Oudh &amp; Rohilkhand railway for many years retiring in 1925 as Assistant Traffic Superintendent. Hubert used to get together with several Old Martinians stationed at Faizabad, to celebrate Founder's Day. This unofficial gathering was the genesis of the present day Old Martinians' Association at Lucknow. Hubert died in 1947 and in his will left instructions that a sum of Rs.5,000 be handed over to the OMA as an 'Endowment Fund'. The annual interest accruing from this investment be used for the purpose of a scholarship to be given to a needy and deserving Anglo-Indian day scholar Boy studying in the Boys' College. Since then, some 50 recipients of the scholarship have reason to be thankful to Hubert Bolst.
In the sporting arena Martinians have forged a proud tradition. George Duncan de la Hoyde was the only student to have won all three (Colts, Juniors and Seniors) athletic Championships during his school career. When the British Raj ended a stream of Anglo-Indian hockey players emigrated to Australia, UK, New Zealand and Canada. The standard of hockey in these countries was vastly improved by the arrival of these players from the sub-continent. Two Martinians who emigrated to Australia deserve special mention. Fred Browne was Australia's first (1956) Olympic coach and Merv Adams was appointed Australian National Coach in 1974. Later, Merv coached the Australian men&lt;U+2019&gt;s and women&lt;U+2019&gt;s teams at the 1976 Montreal Olympics, at which the men won a silver medal. 
In the First and Second World Wars the names of thirty six and eight Martinians respectively, are enshrined on the Rolls of Honour at the College. In succeeding conflicts the exploits of Martinians resonate through the pages of history. A number of soldiers like General Fremantle, General Larkins and airmen like Flight Lieutenant Alfred Cooke (Vir Chakra) served with distinction and brought great credit to their alma mater. Who can forget the Keelor brothers who made history in the Indo-Pakistani wars by shooting down Pakistan&lt;U+2019&gt;s invincible Sabre jets? In a later conflict, Lieutenant Arvind Singh was awarded the Maha Vir Chakra for his exceptional devotion to duty and gallantry during the Indian Peace Keeping Force operations in Sri Lanka. Old Martinians overseas have also served their adopted countries in various theatres of war. In 1950 Corporal Mervyn O'Brien of the King&lt;U+2019&gt;s Own Yorkshire Light Infantry was awarded the Military Medal for gallant and distinguished service in the Malayan conflict. Denzil Simeons and Sydney Lewis served with the Australian Army in Vietnam.
Other notable alumni include:

Muzzafar Ali, a renowned painter, clothing designer, film producer and aspiring politician.
Priyanka Chopra, actress and former Miss World in 200021
Dr. Vijay Mohan Kohli, one of India's leading heart surgeons who is actively involved in the development of cardiological methods both in India and overseas.
Saeed Naqvi, a leading journalist in Delhi.
Kunal Pradhan, cricker writer and sports editor
K. Raghunath, India&lt;U+2019&gt;s Foreign Secretary.
Alan Sealy who attended the College in the sixties achieved world wide recognition with the publication of his first book titled The Trotter-Nama. The book is the history of the Anglo-Indian Trotter family, and is loosely based on the life of Claude Martin. The Time magazine regards Allan as part of a new wave of exciting Indian writers following in the footsteps of Salman Rushdie.

References

See also

Siege of Lucknow
La Martiniere College
La Martiniere Calcutta
La Martiniere Lyon

External links

La Martini&lt;U+00E8&gt;re Boys
La Martini&lt;U+00E8&gt;re Girls College
La Martini&lt;U+00E8&gt;re College
Old Martinians' Association
La Martini&lt;U+00E8&gt;re College entry from the Tutorgig encyclopaedia
David King's website about La Martinere Lucknow
School profile from Indiatimes

fr:Constantia (palais)
Category:La Martiniere College Category:Private schools in India Category:Colonial schools in India Category:Educational institutions established in 1845 Category:Educational institutions established in 1869 Category:Lucknow Category:Schools in Uttar Pradesh



An article by the Lucknow historian Ms. Rosie Llewellyn-Jones in Taj magazine&quot; accessed June 2007↩
A synopsis of the history of La Martiniere College, Lucknow accessed June 2007↩


after his death there were many tons of marble discovered from Jaipur and even China↩

East of Eton William Dalrymple TravelIntelligence.net accessed June 2007↩
An article by the Lucknow historian Ms. Rosie Llewellyn-Jones in Taj magazine&quot;accessed June 2007↩
British Film Institute film and TV database accessed June 2007↩
Individual Indian schools: La Martiniere College by William Fergussonaccessed June 2007↩

Mitra, Chandan. Constant glory: La Martini&lt;U+00E8&gt;re saga 1836-1986. Calcutta: Oxford Univeristy Press, 1987.↩

Gorman, JT. Great exploits: the siege of Lucknow. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1941.↩
La Martiniere Staff and Students Awarded the Indian Mutiny Medal 1857-1859 accessed June 2007↩
&quot;Schoolboy soldiers&quot; Agniva Banerjee Times of India 29 Apr, 2007 accessed June 2007↩




Priyanka Chopra at IndianUncle.com accessed June 2007↩


