
The National Action Alliance for Suicide Prevention (NAASP) is an American nonprofit suicide prevention organization coordinating national efforts to advance the National Strategy for Suicide Prevention (NSSP). It is a public/private partnership that &quot;catalyzes planning, implementation, and accountability for updating and advancing the NSSP.1 The NAASP works on the 2001 National Strategy for Suicide Prevention and is an outgrowth of the Suicide Prevention Resource Center.2 The NAASP will initially focus on three high-risk populations; LGBT Youth, American Indians/Alaska Natives, Military/Veterans.3 Part of the group's campaign will be to educate on the warning signs of suicide, promoting the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline (1-800-273-TALK in the US), as well as community crisis clinics across the U.S.4
Part of the NAASP's work is to identify culturally appropriate interventions to serve various minority populations. Clinical social worker Caitllin Ryan, whose work has been recognized by numerous organizations including the NAASP explains that these are &quot;interventions that address multiple aspects of people's lives, such as ethnicity, culture, language, socioeconomic status and religious diversity in providing services ... [to meet people] where they are, to explain our findings and family approach in ways that cross language and cultural barriers.&quot;5
In December 2011 NAASP partnered with Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA), a branch of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services and Facebook to offer a new service to help offer suicide crisis worker access to users who were flagged by others for posting suicidal comment.6 &quot;The person who posted the suicidal comment will then immediately receive an email from Facebook encouraging them to call the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline at 1-800-273-TALK (8255) or to click on a link to begin a confidential chat session with a crisis worker.&quot;7
Mission
The mission of the NAASP is to advance the 2001 National Stategy for Suicide Prevention by &quot;identifying suicide prevention as a national priority, catalyzing efforts to implement high-priority objectives of the NSSP, and cultivating the sources needed to sustain progress.&quot;8
Task forces
Starting with the three minority groups identified at the formation of the NAASP, individual task forces have been set up within the group to forward the goals using culturally appropriate interventions. Additional task forces have been set up to coordinate overall goals and identify resources. Other tasks forces being considered include ones that focus on Latina teenagers and individuals with disabilities.
LGBT populations
Although first focused on suicide of LGBT youth, the LGBT (lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender) task force expanded to include LGBT of all ages &quot;acknowledging the struggles with suicide idealization, suicide attempts, and death by suicide that many LGBT people confront at different points in their lives.&quot;9 The initial leaders of the task force were Charles Robbins, head of The Trevor Project, which operates a nationwide LGBT youth suicide prevention program, and Kevin Jennings, the then Department of Education&lt;U+2019&gt;s Assistant Deputy Secretary for the Office of Safe and Drug-Free Schools.10Feds support new national LGBT youth suicide prevention task force. Dana Rudolph, Keen News Service, November 19, 2010 Jennings, an openly gay appointee, founded the Gay, Lesbian, and Straight Education Network (GLSEN).11
American Indian and Alaska Native
The American Indian and Alaska Native task force has coordinated two national action summits (August 2011, in Scottsdale, Arizona and October 2011 in Anchorage, Alaska).12 The task force is led by Yvette Roubideaux, Director of Indian Health Service, United States Department of Health &amp; Human Services.13


&quot;The Summits focused on the importance of collaboration among tribal, federal, state, and community- and program-level leadership to promote American Indian and Alaska Native behavioral health.&quot;14


Military and veterans
The Military and Veterans (see United States Department of Veterans Affairs) task force is co-chaired by Jan Kemp, VISN2 Center of Excellence for Suicide Prevention.15 The task force will &quot;join Department of Defense (DoD) and Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) suicide prevention programs already in progress. In doing so, suicide prevention programs aimed at military personnel will combine approaches from both public and private sectors into a single effort.&quot;16
Other
At least three other task forces have been started by the NAASP, Data and Surveillance, Research, and National Strategy for Suicide Prevention.
Executive committee
The initial executive committee was nominated by the general public and reviewed by &quot;a nominating committee comprised of public sector and private sector suicide prevention leaders.&quot;17 Candidates were selected based on criteria including; do they bring a needed perspective to suicide prevention, can they leverage change at the national level; and can they uniquely contribute to the Executive Committee? Since the September 2010 launch new candidates are reviewed by the nominating committee and finalized by the co&lt;U+2010&gt;chairs.18
As of 2012, the leadership committee as listed from the organization's website:19 Co-Chairs:

Public Sector Co-Chair: John M. McHugh, Secretary of the US Army

Private Sector Co-Chair: Gordon H. Smith, President and CEO, National Association of Broadcasters

Full members:

Talitha J. Arnold, Senior Pastor United Church of Santa Fe
Carl Bell, M.D., President and CEO Community Mental Health Council
Tom Berger, Executive Director of the Veterans Health Council, Vietnam Veterans of America
Derek Blumke, President Student Veterans of America
Brian Boon, President and CEO Commission on Accreditation of Rehabilitation Facilities
Robert Certain, Director The Episcopal Church of Saint Peter and Saint Paul
David Covington, Vice-President, Adult &amp; Youth Services, Magellan Health Services
Judy Cushing, President and CEO Oregon Partnership
Helen Darling, President and CEO National Business Group on Health
Mary Durham, Vice-President Kaiser Permanente
Brian Dyak, President and CEO Entertainment Industries Council, Inc.
Saul Feldman, Chairman Emeritus United Behavioral Health
David Grossman, Medical Director, Preventive Care Group Health Research Institute
McClellan Hall, Executive Director National Indian Youth Leadership Project
Jack Heath, Founder and CEO Inspire USA Foundation
Andrew Lane, Executive Director Johnson Family Foundation
Beverly Malone, CEO National League for Nursing
Coloradas Mangas, Ruidoso High School
Jamie Moyer Co-founder Moyer Foundation
Karen Moyer Co-founder Moyer Foundation]]
Jerry Reed, Director Suicide Prevention Resource Center
Phil Satow, Representative National Council for Suicide Prevention
Paul M. Schyve, Senior Vice President, Healthcare Improvement The Joint Commission
Joe Sullivan, Chief Security Officer Facebook, Inc.
David Theron Smith, Divisional Vice President &lt;U+2013&gt; Risk Management Family Dollar Stores, Inc.
Robert W. Turner, Senior Vice President &lt;U+2013&gt; Corporate Relations Union Pacific Railroad
Eduardo Vega, Executive Director Mental Health Association of San Francisco
Larry Echo Hawk, Assistant Secretary of Indian Affairs United States Department of the Interior
Mary Hayashi, Chair, Assembly Business, California Professions &amp; Consumer Protection Committee, California State Assembly
Michael Hogan, Commissioner New York State Office of Mental Health
Pamela Hyde, Administrator Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration
Robert Jesse, Principal Deputy Under Secretary for Health United States Department of Veterans Affairs
Mary Lou Leary, Acting Assistant United States Attorney General, Office of Justice Programs, EX OFFICIO Members
Regina Benjamin, Surgeon General of the United States, Office of the Surgeon General
Thomas Frieden, Director Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Kathy Greenlee, Assistant Secretary for Aging Administration on Aging
Thomas Insel, Director National Institute of Mental Health
Howard K. Koh, Assistant Secretary for Health United States Department of Health and Human Services
Yvette Roubideaux, Director Indian Health Service
Mary Wakefield, Administrator Health Resources and Services Administration

See also

List of suicide prevention organizations
Living Is For Everyone

References

External links

National Strategy For Suicide Prevention: Goals and Objectives for Action

Agencies and organizations

CDC website on Suicide Prevention
The Suicide Prevention Resource Center (SPRC) provides prevention support, training, and resources to assist organizations and individuals to develop suicide prevention programs, interventions and policies, and to advance the National Strategy for Suicide Prevention.
Stamp Out Suicide!
The JED Foundation is the leading nonprofit organization working to reduce the rate of suicide and the prevalence of emotional distress among college students.
Suicide Prevention:Effectiveness and Evaluation A 32-page guide from SPAN USA, the National Center for Injury Prevention and Control, and Education Development Center, Inc.
American Association of Suicidology is a membership organization for all those involved in suicide prevention and intervention, or touched by suicide.
American Foundation for Suicide Prevention is the leading not-for-profit dedicated to preventing suicide through research, education and advocacy.
Suicide Prevention Action Network USA
International Association for Suicide Prevention Organization co-sponsors World Suicide Prevention Day on September 10 every year with the World Health Organization (WHO).
U.S. Surgeon General - Suicide Prevention
Suicide.org
Samaritans of Singapore is a non-profit and non-religious organisation which aims to provide 24-hour confidential emotional support to people in crisis, thinking of suicide or affected by suicide.

Journals of suicide prevention research

Suicide and Life Threatening Behavior
Archives of Suicide Research
Crisis: The Journal of Crisis Intervention and Suicide Prevention



 



Suicide Prevention, United States Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration, June 3, 2011. 1↩
Dana Rudolph, HHS awards up to $22.4 million for suicide prevention, Keen News Service, November 11, 2010.↩
Three High-Risk Populations Targeted for National Suicide Prevention Efforts: Task Forces Focus on LGBT Youth, American Indians/Alaska Natives, Military/Veterans, OutWord Magazine, December 30, 2010.↩
High numbers of suicides in region raise red flags: Officials trying to determine if figures are a fluke or trend, what can be done, Karen Ann Cullotta, Chicago Tribune, January 15, 2010. 2↩
Helping LGBT youth, others learn to cope, Visalia Times-Delta, April 27, 2012. 3↩
Facebook Provides First-of-a-Kind Service To Help Prevent Suicides, Morning Zen, December 14, 2011, Children's Mental Health Network. 4↩
Suicide Prevention: Facebook Service Allows Members to Report Comments, Tim Akimoff, KTUU Channel 2 News, December 13, 2011. 5↩
Bending the Curve on Suicide, Thomas Insell, August 01, 2011, National Institute of Mental Health. 6↩
National Action Alliance for Suicide Prevention Tackles LGBT Suicide, Kellan Baker and Josh Garcia, April 26, 2012, NAASP bloodspot. 7↩
8↩

Protecting Life in Indian Country, Yvette Roubideaux, JANUARY 31, 2012, NAASP. 9↩


VISN 2 Health Care Services: Behavioral VA Health Care News, U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs, November 1, 2011. 10↩
Suicide Prevention Task Force Targets Military Personnel, January 7, 2011, posted to LaVan and Neidenberg (likely a press release reprint). 11↩
How are the Executive Committee and Task Force Members Chosen? National Action Alliance for Suicide Prevention, Jan 14, 2011. 12↩

Leadership, National Action Alliance for Suicide Prevention, 2010-2012. 13↩


