
Route 130 is a mostly North/South provincial highway in the Canadian province of New Brunswick. The road has a length of approximately 108 kilometers, and services small, otherwise isolated rural communities. In these areas, the highway is often unofficially referred to as &quot;Main Street.&quot; The Highway is known as Broadway, Portage Road in Grand Falls and West Riverside Drive in Perth-Andover.
History
Route 130 was created in 1965 as a short spur from the Trans-Canada Highway into Grand Falls. When a new 4-lane TCH was opened in 2007, the route was extended by over 95 km south from Grand Falls along the former TCH to Aroostook, along a formerly unnumbered route (part of the original Route 2 until the 1960s) from Aroostook to Perth-Andover, the former TCH again from Perth-Andover to Somerville (near Hartland), and a new access road that meets up with the new highway at Waterville.
Intersecting routes

Begins at Broadway Blvd Route 108 in Grand Falls, New Brunswick.
Turns onto Portage Street in Grand Falls
Crosses the Route 2 in Grand Falls Portage
Crosses the Route 2 again in Argosy
Crosses the Route 2 again in North of Four Falls.
Crosses the Route 2 again in Aroostook. changing to Main Street/Aroostook road.
Meets with Route 190 in Perth-Andover.
Meets with Route 560 in River de Chutes
Meets with Route 110 in Florenceville.
Intersection at Route 105 in Florenceville.
Meets with Route 104 in Hartland
Intersection at Route 105 in Hartland
Intersection at Route 103 in Somerville
Meets with Route 590 North of Waterville
Ending in Route 2 north of Waterville, New Brunswick

River crossings

River de Chute River, River de Chute
Saint John River, Florenceville
Saint John River, Upper Brighton to Somerville (Hugh John Flemming Bridge)

Communities along Route

Grand Falls
Grand Falls Portage
Limestone
Four Falls
Aroostook
Aroostook Junction
Perth-Andover
Hillandale
Beaconsfield
Bairdsville
River de Chute
Clearview
Upper Wicklow
Wicklow
Florenceville
Riverbank
Stickney
Lansdowne
Upper Brighton
Somerville
Waterville

See also

List of New Brunswick provincial highways

References


130 130 130
