
Plantagenet Somerset Fry (3 January 1931 – 10 September 1996) was a British historian, who wrote more than fifty books.1
Life
Peter George Robin Fry was born in 1931, and was the third child and only son of a distinguished naval officer and pianist2. He was educated at Lancing College in West Sussex, and St. Thomas's Hospital Medical School, London, but did not do well at either institution. He added &quot;Plantagenet&quot; to his name when he was young, and the &quot;Somerset&quot; part of his surname was added by a deed poll.3 After failing his exams, he had to leave the school after a year. From this point on his father refused to pay for him any more, and so Fry got a job as a librarian and projectionist with the National Film Board of Canada. In 1952 he inherited some money from his grandmother, and so he left his job and married Audrey Russell, whom he had known at medical school, against his parents' wishes. After spending all his money, and failing another degree, Fry became a schoolteacher in Weybridge, Surrey.4
Success
In 1954 Fry went to Oxford University to study law and history. Needing more money, he twice took part in the television game show Double Your Money, and won the jackpot of &lt;U+00A3&gt;5125, making him somewhat a celebrity, and had his first book Mysteries of History published, soon followed by a biography of Elizabeth I. This was the start of a successful writing career, and over the years he wrote books about history, antiques and for children. He started an organisation called the Council for Independent Archaeology which continued after he lost interest.6
Personal problems
Although successful, Fry's personal life was unhappy. His first marriage to Audrey Russell was dissolved in 1957, and the following year he married Daphne York. Unfortunately she was soon diagnosed with an incurable form of kidney cancer, although Fry never let her know it. After her death in 1961 he set up a medical research trust in her memory. He then married Leri Butler, a divorc&lt;U+00E9&gt;e twenty-four years his senior. The marriage ended in divorce in 1973, and the year after he married Fiona Whitcombe, who survived him.
He was also the victim of several car crashes, one of which confined him to a wheelchair for many years. He did not use a literary agent, as he was often worried about his financial state. In 1996, Fry was told he was dying of bowel cancer, but he refused treatment, and suffocated himself with a plastic bag at his home in Wattisfield, Suffolk at the age of sixty-five7 after writing a letter explaining his actions to the coroner.8
References


Category:1931 births Category:1996 deaths Category:British writers



Obituary, The (London) Independent, Roy Calne, 21 September 1996 accessed 11 December 2007↩
ArchiveHub accessed 11 December 2007↩








