
Nancy Andrews}} 
Nancy Lee Andrews (May 14, 1947) is a former international model turned photographer who is based in Nashville. She published a collection of her photography, A Dose of Rock 'n' Roll, in 2008.
Early life
Andrews was born on May 14, 1947 in Jersey City, New Jersey. When Andrews turned seventeen, she literally bumped into television legend Arthur Godfrey on a busy Manhattan street. She shared her bad day with the radio icon and a quick friendship blossomed. He arranged for Andrews a meeting with Ford Models. It turned out to be his last day in Manhattan and he wanted to leave the city by doing a good deed.
Andrews was on the other side of the camera for years, working as a Ford model for some of the greatest photographers of the '60s and '70s. They included Richard Avedon, Dick Ballerian, Irving Penn, Hiro, Bert Stern, Gordon Munro, and Milton Greene, who recognized that Andrews had a burning desire to click the shutter.
Rock photographer
Encouraged by former Beatle Ringo Starr, Andrews began shooting fashion assignments for designer boutiques along Rodeo Drive and trendy Melrose Avenue. She branched quickly into the music business, snapping photos of many rock performers as well as shooting publicity and photo packages for two of Ringo Starr albums &lt;U+2013&gt; Ringo the 4th and Bad Boy.
Nashville
Andrews moved to Nashville, Tennessee in 1994 and opened her photography studio in Cummins Station the following year. In 1996 she was appointed director of photography for Twang, a Vanity Fair take on country music.
In addition to CD packages and promotional photography for major labels, her work has appeared in and on the covers of McCall's, USA Today, JAZZIZ, Penthouse, Black Enterprise, Music Row, People, and several other music publications. She also shoots for many advertising agencies.
Personal
Andrews is married to Edwin Barnes (1990). She was previously engaged to Ringo Starr, whom she sued for palimony. She has two younger sisters and two dogs.
References

Andrews, Nancy Lee (2008). A Dose of Rock 'n' Roll. Dalton Watson Fine Books. ISBN 978-1-8544-3230-8
New York Magazine Jan 10, 1983, &quot;The Prince of Palimony&quot;

External links

Nancy Lee Andrews - http://www.nancyleeandrews.com
A Dose Of Rock 'n' Roll - http://www.adoseofrocknroll.com
IconicPhotos.com - http://www.iconicphotos.com



Category:1947 births Category:Living people Category:People from Jersey City, New Jersey Category:People from Nashville, Tennessee Category:American photographers Category:American female models Category:American women photographers
