
&quot;The Day The Earth Stood Cool&quot; is the seventh episode of the 24th season of The Simpsons. It premiered on December 9, 2012 as part of Fox's Animation Domination programming block.
Plot
When the Simpsons family gets new cool neighbors Terrence and Emily from Portland,12 Homer is desperate to fit in with their lifestyle so he himself can become cool. However, during the couple's son T-Rex's birthday party, T-Rex is rude about Homer, insulting a present he made for him. Angered by this, Bart defends his father and fights him. Meanwhile, Marge is disturbed by Emily and her friends' breastfeeding of their babies, revealing that she only gives Maggie baby formula. These altercations cause Homer to be ostracized by Terrence, Emily, and their friends. Enraged by this, Homer wages a war with Terrence and Emily, who reveal that they have called in all of the cool people from Portland. Soon, Springfield is overrun by the cool people, overwhelming Homer and Marge. Meanwhile, Bart and T-Rex reconcile, and Bart invites T-Rex to watch TV with him. T-Rex obliges, abandoning a compost harvester owned by his family, which causes a fire that engulfs Terrence and Emily's house. Homer and Terrence arrive to the devastation and work together to put out the fire using a large collection of baby formula bottles bought by Marge. Terrence and Emily apologize to Homer and Marge and plan on staying in Springfield, but they change their minds when they find that all of the cool people have moved to Springfield, therefore making the town &quot;played out&quot;. The family leaves with all of the other cool people, much to Lisa's dismay.
Production
This is the fourth episode as show runner for longtime Simpsons writer Matt Selman. Selman had long had plans to eventually have the Simpsons visit Portland, an idea he first conceived after former Simpsons writer Bill Oakley moved to Oregon,3 but &quot;that had to change once Portlandia made its successful debut.&quot;4 Oakley is now writing for Portlandia. Armisen and Brownstein recorded their lines about a year in advance.56
Cultural references

The episode's title is a reference to the film The Day the Earth Stood Still. In one scene, Terrence and Emily read The Onion and The A.V. Club reviews, referencing the recent critical reviews the two reviewers have been giving the show.
Other references include:

Terrence runs a doughnut shop inspired by Voodoo Doughnut.78
Homer mentions David Cross in the Alvin and the Chipmunks trilogy.
T-Rex has a West Ham United F.C. banner in his room9 with wrong colours.10
Disco Stu appears in a Daft Punk costume

Reception
Ratings
The episode was watched by a total of 7.44 million viewers and it received a 3.4 rating in the 18-49 demographic making it the most watched show on Animation Domination that night in both total viewers and the 18-49 demographic.11
Critical reception
Robert David Sullivan from The A.V. Club gave the episode a B+, saying, &quot;It's one of the most disciplined Simpsons episodes ever, with no B-plots and nary a tangent, and it&lt;U+2019&gt;s the most consistently funny so far this season.&quot;12
References

ru:The Day the Earth Stood Cool
Category:The Simpsons (season 24) episodes











↩
↩
http://tvbythenumbers.zap2it.com/2012/12/11/sunday-final-ratings-american-dad-adjusted-up-final-football-numbers/161101/↩
http://www.avclub.com/articles/the-day-the-earth-stood-cool,89432/↩


