Lieutenant Commander John Cyril Porte RN CMG US DCM (26 February 1884 - 22 October 19191) was a flying boat pioneer associated with the World War I Seaplane Experimental Station at Felixstowe.
At an early age Porte joined the Royal Navy submarine service, but contracted tuberculosis and was discharged in 1911. Instead he learnt to fly and participated in air races, before becoming interested in flying boats. He met American aircraft designer Glenn Curtiss at Volk's Seaplane Base at Brighton, and they worked together on a design in the USA for the &quot;America&quot; flying boat, in which they intended to cross the Atlantic, but the commencement of hostilities in 1914 stopped this plan.
War service
His health not withstanding, he returned to England and was recommissioned a Wing Commander in the Royal Naval Air Service and given command of a training unit in Hendon and later the naval air base at Felixstowe. While in this position he encouraged the purchase of Curtiss H-4 flying boats, a military version of their earlier twin 100 h.p. &quot;America&quot; flying boat design. These early flying boats did not have sufficient power, and were soon re-engined with Anzani powerplants. More Curtiss aircraft were ordered, but their 160 h.p. Curtiss engines were soon replaced with 250 h.p. Rolls-Royce Falcon engines, being known as H-12s or 'Large Americas'.
Porte's first design to be implemented in Felixstowe was the Felixstowe Porte Baby, a large, three-engined biplane flying-boat powered by one central pusher and two outboard tractor Rolls-Royce Eagle engines.
Porte modified an H-4 with a new hull whose improved hydrodynamic qualities made taxiing, take-off and landing much more practical, and called it the Felixstowe F.1. Porte then modified the hull of the larger Curtiss H12 flying boat, creating the Felixstowe F.2, which was greatly superior to the original Curtiss boat. Under his supervision the Seaplane Experimental Station continued to enlarge and improve the design of the Felixstowe aircraft independently of Curtiss, through the F.3 and the F.5; Porte's final design was the 123' span five-engined Felixstowe Fury triplane (also known as the &quot;Porte Super-Baby&quot;).

Bristol Scout atop the Porte Baby, 1916.

The Felixstowes were mainly used on long range patrols to look for the German fleet or submarines, however the aircraft were also initially used successfully to intercept Zeppelins. To keep away from this danger Zeppelins were forced to fly higher, resulting in Porte developing the first composite aircraft experiments in 1916, with a Porte Baby carrying a small Bristol Scout fighter piggyback. The flying boat would provide the long range while the fighter would be able to climb rapidly to engage the enemy. Porte successfully flew the Baby launch craft in its one and only trial flight, and, although the parasite was successfully released, the scheme was abandoned as impractical for North Sea conditions2.
Several hundred seaplanes of Porte's design were built for war-time patrolling the east coast of England, for naval reconnaissance around the Mediterranean Sea, and were even sold to the US for coast patrols. Armed with torpedoes and depth charges they could attack ships and U-boats. A measure of of the success of Porte's work is that the Curtiss Aeroplane and Motor Company manufactured the F.5 as the F5L and Aeromarine 75.
In November 1917 Porte and William Augustus Casson were indicted in London's Central Criminal Court on charges of profiteering under the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1906. Before the war, Porte had arranged to receive a 20-25% commission on all Curtiss flying boats that he sold. Porte continued to receive monies secretly through Casson, as a commission agent, when he was in the position of ordering aircraft on behalf of the Navy, and was accused of receiving &lt;U+00A3&gt;48,000 in this manner3. Casson was found guilty but, on the return of the money, charges against Porte were dropped in light on his failing health and important war service4.
Death
Porte was in Brighton in 1919 when his tuberculosis at last overcame him and he died on 22 October. He is buried in West Norwood Cemetery where his monument is a cross and anchor.
Sir Walter Raleigh, quoted in Flight Magazine in 1955, summed up the importance of Porte's work during the First World War as follows: &quot;The shortest possible list of those who saved the country in its hour of need would have to include his name.&quot; 5
He was not quite 36 when he died.
References

External links

Felixstowe Seaplane Designs accessed 28 June 2007
Early Aviators accessed 28 June 2007
Rodenplant - development of the Felixstowe F2 accessed 28 June 2007



Category:1884 births Category:1919 deaths Category:Deaths from tuberculosis Category:English aerospace engineers Category:Aviation pioneers Category:Burials at West Norwood Cemetery Category:Recipients of the Distinguished Conduct Medal Category:Companions of the Order of St Michael and St George Category:Royal Navy officers



Notice of Death, Flight PDF Archive, 30 October 1919↩
Composite Aircraft, Flight PDF Archive, 11 November 1937↩
Admiralty Aircraft Contracts The Times 13-20 August 1917↩
The Admiralty Contracts Case, Flight PDF Archive, 22 November 1917↩
Felixstowe Flying Boats, Flight PDF Archive, 23 December 1955↩


