
&quot;The Lemon Song&quot; is a song by English rock band Led Zeppelin, featured on their 1969 album Led Zeppelin II. It was recorded at Mystic Studios in Hollywood when the band was on their second concert tour of the United States.
&quot;The Lemon Song&quot; is laced with sexual innuendo, and features some of Led Zeppelin's most blues-influenced playing. It was recorded virtually live in the studio, and no electronic devices were used to create the echo on Robert Plant's vocal. It was made solely by Plant's voice and the acoustics in Mystic Studios, which was a 16 x 16 foot room with wooden walls.1
Another notable aspect of this song is John Paul Jones' complex bass performance, which is heavily funk influenced. During interviews afterwards, he said that he had improvised during the entire song. It is considered by many to be his best bass performance to date.
The song borrows significantly from Howlin' Wolf's &quot;Killing Floor&quot;, which was a song Led Zeppelin often incorporated into their live setlist during their first concert tour of the United States. For the second and third North American tours the song evolved into &quot;The Lemon Song&quot;, with Plant often improvising lyrics onstage. However, despite Howlin' Wolf's influence on the arrangement, the album sleeve of Led Zeppelin II initially credited only the four members of Led Zeppelin.
Other lyrics, notably &quot;squeeze (my lemon) 'til the juice runs down my leg,&quot; can be traced to Robert Johnson's &quot;Traveling Riverside Blues&quot;. It is most likely that Johnson borrowed this himself, from a song recorded in the same year (1937) called &quot;She Squeezed My Lemon&quot; (by Arthur McKay).2 Robert Johnson's name has never been added to the credits for &quot;The Lemon Song&quot;. The song also borrowed from Albert King's &quot;Cross-Cut Saw&quot;.3
&quot;The Lemon Song&quot; was performed live on Led Zeppelin's first three concert tours of the United States (on the first tour as &quot;Killing Floor&quot;), before being dropped from their live set in late 1969. However, the 'squeeze my lemon' sequence continued to be inserted into the &quot;Whole Lotta Love&quot; medley and ad-libbed elsewhere.4
In December 1972, Arc Music, owner of the publishing rights to Howlin' Wolf's songs, sued Led Zeppelin for copyright infringement on &quot;The Lemon Song.&quot;5 The parties settled out of court. Though the amount was not disclosed, Wolf received a check for $45,123 from Arc Music immediately following the suit.6 (Interestingly, Wolf sued Arc Music less than two years later.)7 Today, Chester Burnett (Howlin' Wolf's real name) has the songwriting credit for &quot;The Lemon Song&quot;.8
Jimmy Page performed this song on his tour with The Black Crowes in 1999. A version of &quot;The Lemon Song&quot; performed by Page and The Black Crowes can be found on the album Live at the Greek.
References

Sources

Led Zeppelin: Dazed and Confused: The Stories Behind Every Song, by Chris Welch, ISBN 1-56025-818-7
The Complete Guide to the Music of Led Zeppelin, by Dave Lewis, ISBN 0-7119-3528-9



de:The Lemon Song es:The Lemon Song hu:The Lemon Song ru:The Lemon Song
Lemon Song, The Category:1969 songs



Dave Lewis (1994), The Complete Guide to the Music of Led Zeppelin, Omnibus Press, ISBN 0-7119-3528-9↩
Australian Broadcasting Corporation - Triple J Music Specials - Led Zeppelin (first broadcast 2000-07-12)↩
Dave Lewis (1994), The Complete Guide to the Music of Led Zeppelin, Omnibus Press, ISBN 0-7119-3528-9.↩
Dave Lewis (1994), The Complete Guide to the Music of Led Zeppelin, Omnibus Press, ISBN 0-7119-3528-9.↩
Segrest, James, and Mark Hoffman. Moanin' at Midnight: The Life and Times of Howlin' Wolf. Thunder's Mouth Press, 2005. p. 235.↩
Segrest and Hoffman, p. 299.↩
ibid.↩
Michael Goldberg, &quot;Willie Dixon Sues Led Zeppelin over 'Whole Lotta Love.'&quot; Rolling Stone (March 14, 1985), p. 12.↩


