
The Australian cricket team toured the West Indies in the 1977-78 season to play a five-match Test series against the West Indies. The tour also encompassed a pair of One Day Internationals, plus six tour matches against the West Indies' first class sides.
The West Indies won the test series 3-1 with one match drawn. The West Indies therefore regained the Sir Frank Worrell Trophy which had been lost in 1968. They would hold this trophy against Australia until 1995.
Australian squad
Australia had just defeated India 3-2 at home during the 1977-78 season; however, the team was rebuilding in the wake of defections of players to World Series Cricket. Most of these players were available for selection but the furore had led the Australian Cricket Board refusing to consider those players that had signed up to play in WSC for selection to the national side.
The original squad selected were as follows:

Batsmen - Bob Simpson (captain), Graham Yallop, Peter Toohey, Rick Darling, Graeme Wood, Craig Serjeant, Kim Hughes, Gary Cosier
Fastbowlers - Jeff Thomson (vice captain), Wayne Clark, Ian Callen
Spinners - Bruce Yardley, Jim Higgs
All rounder - Trevor Laughlin
Wicketkeeper - Steve Rixon

Replacements
Kim Hughes fell ill during the tour and David Ogilvie was flown out as a replacement.
Tour matches
Leeward Islands v Australia

Trinidad &amp; Tobago v Australia

Barbados v Australia

Guyana v Australia

Windward Islands v Australia

Jamaica v Australia

ODI Series
1st ODI

2nd ODI

Test series
The furore over World Series Cricket had led the ACB to refuse to consider for selection to the national team any Australian player that had signed up to WSC. The West Indies Cricket Board took a different view, and chose a number of their players from those signed to the Kerry Packer organisation for the first two games. This led to the West Indies easily beating the tourists to take a 2-0 lead in the series. However, in the lead up to the 3rd Test in Guyana, the WICB made a decision to leave out three of their WSC contracted players, ostensibly to allow others a chance to play in test matches prior to the West Indies' tour to India and Sri Lanka later in the year, which would be at a time that World Series Cricket could not guarantee the availability of their West Indian players. The non-selection of these three players led to the resignation of Clive Lloyd as captain, and all of the WSC contracted West Indian players to declare themselves unavailable for the rest of the series.1 Australia won the 3rd test, but lost the 4th. Australia were on track to win the 5th test but the crowd rioted and the game had to be called off early.2
1st Test

2nd Test

3rd Test

4th Test

5th Test

Controversies
The tour was plagued by a number of controversies including to no-balling of two Australian bowlers, Wayne Clark and Bruce Yardley.3
References

External links

Australian Tour of West Indies 1977-78 at Cricket Archive



Category:1978 in cricket 1977-78 Category:West Indian cricket seasons from 1970&lt;U+2013&gt;71 to 1999&lt;U+2013&gt;2000 Category:International cricket competitions from 1975&lt;U+2013&gt;76 to 1980 Category:1978 in Caribbean sport



West Indies v Australia - Wisden↩
Peter Toohey, 'Rumble in Jamaica', Cricinfo accessed 26 May 2012↩
Wisden summary of Australian tour of West Indies 1977-78↩


