
James George Janos1 (born July 15, 1951), best known as Jesse &quot;The Body&quot; Ventura, is an American politician, retired professional wrestler and color commentator, Navy UDT veteran, actor, and former radio and television talk show host. As a professional wrestler, he is best known for his tenure in the World Wrestling Federation as a wrestler and color commentator. In 2004, he was inducted into the company's Hall of Fame.2
In the Minnesota gubernatorial election of 1998, running as an Independent and member of the Reform Party, he was elected the 38th Governor of Minnesota and served from January 4, 1999 to January 6, 2003 without seeking a second term.
Early life
Ventura was born James George Janos in Minneapolis, the son of Bernice Martha (n&lt;U+00E9&gt;e Lenz) and George William Janos. His father's parents were from what is today Slovakia, and his mother was of German descent.3 Ventura has described himself as Slovak.4 Ventura (then still using his legal name of Janos) attended the now-closed Cooper Elementary School, and graduated from Minneapolis' Roosevelt High School in 1969.
From September 11, 1969 to September 10, 1975, during the Vietnam War era, he served in the United States Navy.5 While on active duty, Ventura was part of Underwater Demolition Team 12 (UDT).6 The UDT was merged with the US Navy SEALs in 1983, 8 years after Ventura was no longer in the Navy. He was awarded the National Defense Service Medal and the Vietnam Service Medal but was not in combat thus did not qualify for the Combat Action Ribbon.
In 1973, Ventura was a full-patch member of the San Diego chapter of the Mongols, an outlaw motorcycle gang and organized crime syndicate for nine months, and rose to the rank of Sergeant-at-Arms. His nickname by Mongol members was &quot;Superman&quot;. Ventura has said on The Howard Stern Show in 2009 that &quot;once you're a Mongol, you're always a Mongol.&quot;78
He returned to Minnesota, and attended North Hennepin Community College in the mid-1970s, at the same time he began weightlifting and wrestling. He was a bodyguard for The Rolling Stones for a short time before he ventured into professional wrestling and changed his name.9
Professional wrestling career

Early career
He created the stage name Jesse &quot;The Body&quot; Ventura to go with the persona of a bully-ish beach bodybuilder, picking the name &quot;Ventura&quot; from a map as part of his &quot;bleach blond from California&quot; character.10 As a wrestler, Ventura performed as a villain and often used the motto &quot;Win if you can, lose if you must, but always cheat!&quot; Much of his flamboyant persona was copied from &quot;Superstar&quot; Billy Graham, a charismatic and popular performer during the 1970s and '80s.1112 Years later, as a broadcaster, Ventura made a running joke out of claiming that Graham stole all of his ring attire ideas from him.
Singles and tag team success
In 1975, Ventura made his debut in the Central States territory, before moving to the Pacific Northwest, where he wrestled for promoter Don Owen as Jesse &quot;The Great&quot; Ventura.1314 Sometime later, he adopted the more permanent nickname, &quot;The Body&quot;. During his stay in Portland, Oregon, he had notable feuds with Dutch Savage and Jimmy Snuka and won the Pacific Northwest Wrestling title twice (once from each wrestler), and the tag team title five times (twice each with Bull Ramos and &quot;Playboy&quot; Buddy Rose, and once with Jerry Oates). He later moved to his hometown promotion, the American Wrestling Association in Minnesota, and began teaming with Adrian Adonis as the &quot;East-West Connection&quot; in 1979.1516 The duo won the promotion's World Tag Team Championship on July 20, 1980 on a forfeit when Verne Gagne, one-half of the tag team champions along with Mad Dog Vachon, failed to show up for a title defense in Denver, Colorado.17 The duo held the belts for nearly a year, losing to &quot;The High Flyers&quot; (Greg Gagne and Jim Brunzell).18
Retirement and commentary
Shortly after losing the belts, the duo moved on to the World Wrestling Federation, where they were managed by &quot;Classy&quot; Freddie Blassie.19 Although the duo was unable to capture the World Tag Team Championship, both Adonis and Ventura became singles title contenders, each earning several title shots at World Heavyweight Champion Bob Backlund.20
Ventura continued to wrestle until September 1984, when blood clots in his lungs ended his in-ring career; it forced him to miss a title match against WWF Champion Hulk Hogan.21 Ventura claimed the blood clots were a result of his exposure to Agent Orange during his time in Vietnam.2223 Ventura did return to the ring to participate in a six-man tag team match in December 1985 as he, Roddy Piper, and &quot;Cowboy&quot; Bob Orton defeated Hillbilly Jim, Uncle Elmer, and Cousin Luke in a match which was broadcast on Saturday Night's Main Event.24 After a failed comeback bid, he began to do color commentary on television for All-Star Wrestling (replacing Angelo Mosca) and later Superstars of Wrestling (initially alongside Vince McMahon and Bruno Sammartino, and with McMahon after Sammartino's departure from the WWF in 1988), hosted his own talk segment on the WWF's Superstars of Wrestling called &quot;The Body Shop&quot;, and did color commentary on radio for a few National Football League teams (among them, the Minnesota Vikings and Tampa Bay Buccaneers).25 Ventura most notably co-hosted Saturday Night's Main Event with Vince McMahon and the first six WrestleManias (1985&lt;U+2013&gt;1990) and most of the WWF's pay-per-views at the time with Gorilla Monsoon (the lone exception for Ventura being the first SummerSlam, in which Ventura served as the guest referee during the main event). Following a dispute with WWF Chairman Vince McMahon over him using his image for the video game company Sega, McMahon&lt;U+2014&gt;who had a contract with rival company Nintendo at the time&lt;U+2014&gt;released Ventura from the company in August 1990.26
In February 1992 at WCW SuperBrawl II, Ventura joined World Championship Wrestling as a commentator. His professional wrestling commentary style was an extension of his wrestling persona, as he was partial to the villains, which was something new and different at the time,27 but would still occasionally give credit where it was due, praising the athleticism of Dynamite Kid and Randy Savage (who was championed by Ventura for years, even when he was a fan favorite). The lone exception to this rule was the WrestleMania VI match between Hulk Hogan and the Ultimate Warrior. Since they were both crowd favorites, Ventura took a neutral position in his commentary; even praising Hogan's display of sportsmanship at the end of the match when he handed over the WWF Championship to the Warrior after he lost the title. The praise of Hogan's action was unusual for Ventura because he regularly rooted against Hogan during his matches. Hogan and Ventura were, at one point, close friends.28 Ventura, however, abruptly ended the friendship after he discovered, during his lawsuit against Vince McMahon, that Hogan was the one who had told Vince about Ventura's attempt to form a labor union in 1984.29 Ventura was released by WCW President Eric Bishoff for falling asleep during a WCW Worldwide TV taping at Disney MGM Studios in July 1994, though its been speculated the move may have had more to do with Hulk Hogan's arrival shortly before.30
Litigation
In 1987, while negotiating his contract as a WWF commentator, Ventura waived his rights to royalties on videotape sales when he was falsely told that only feature performers received such royalties. In 1991, having discovered that other non-feature performers received royalties, Ventura brought an action for fraud, misappropriation of publicity rights, and quantum meruit in Minnesota state court against Titan Sports. Titan removed the case to federal court, and Ventura won an $801,333 jury verdict on the last claim. The judgment was affirmed on appeal, and the case,''31 '' 65 F.3d 725 (8th Cir.1995), is an important result in the law of restitution.
As a result of Ventura's lawsuit, whenever WWE uses his commentary for mass marketed VHS/DVD, Ventura gets a percentage of the sales.
Return to the World Wrestling Federation / Entertainment
In mid-1999, Ventura reappeared on WWF television during his term as Governor of Minnesota, acting as the special guest referee for main event of SummerSlam held in Minneapolis.32 Ventura would continue his relationship with the WWF by performing commentary for Vince McMahon's short-lived XFL.33 On the March 20, 2003 episode of SmackDown!, Ventura appeared in a taped interview to talk about the match between McMahon and Hulk Hogan at WrestleMania XIX.34 Less than a year later, he would be inducted into the WWE Hall of Fame on March 13, 2004 and the following night at WrestleMania XX, he approached the ring to interview Donald Trump, who had a front row seat at the event.35 Trump affirmed that Ventura would receive his moral and financial support were he to ever reenter the world of politics. Alluding to the 2008 election, Ventura boldly announced that &quot;In 2008, maybe we oughta put a wrestler in the White House&quot;. On the June 11, 2007 episode of Raw, Ventura appeared to give comments about Vince McMahon.36
Ventura was guest host on the November 23, 2009 episode of Raw during which he retained his villainous persona by siding with the number one contender, Sheamus over WWE Champion John Cena. This happened while he confronted Cena about how it was unfair that Cena always got a title shot in the WWE while Ventura didn't during his WWE career. After that Sheamus attacked Cena and put him through a table. Ventura then made the match a Title match at TLC: Tables, Ladders &amp; Chairs. During the show, for the first time in nearly 20 years, Vince McMahon joined Ventura at ringside to provide match commentary together.
Acting career
Ventura acted in the 1987 movie Predator, whose cast included future California Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger and future Kentucky Gubernatorial candidate Sonny Landham.37 He appeared in two episodes of Zorro filmed in Madrid, Spain in 1991. He had a starring role in the 1990 sci-fi movie Abraxas, Guardian of the Universe, and supporting roles in The Running Man, Demolition Man, Repossessed, Ricochet, The Master of Disguise (in which he steals the Liberty Bell), and Batman &amp; Robin - the first and last of these also starring Schwarzenegger. Ventura also made a cameo appearance in Major League II, as &quot;White Lightning&quot;. He also appeared as a self help guru (voice only) in The Ringer trying to turn Johnny Knoxville into a more confident worker. Ventura also had a cameo in The X-Files episode &quot;Jose Chung's From Outer Space&quot; as a Man in Black alongside fellow 'MiB' Alex Trebek. In 2008, Ventura filmed the independent comedy Woodshop, starring as a high school shop teacher named Mr. Madson. The film was scheduled for a 2009 release.
Political career
Mayor of Brooklyn Park
Following his departure from the WWF, Ventura took advice from a former high school teacher and ran for mayor of Brooklyn Park, Minnesota in 1990.38 Ventura defeated the city's 18-year incumbent mayor and served from 1991 to 1995.39
Governor of Minnesota

Ventura ran for Governor of Minnesota in 1998 as the nominee for the Reform Party of Minnesota (he later joined the Independence Party of Minnesota when the Reform Party broke from its association with the Reform Party of the United States of America). His campaign consisted of a combination of aggressive grassroots events and original television spots, designed by quirky adman Bill Hillsman, using the phrase &quot;Don't vote for politics as usual.&quot; He spent considerably less than his opponents (about $300,000) and was a pioneer in his using the Internet as a medium of reaching out to voters in a political campaign.40
He won the election in November 1998, narrowly (and unexpectedly) defeating the major-party candidates, St. Paul mayor Norm Coleman (Republican) and Minnesota Attorney General Hubert H. &quot;Skip&quot; Humphrey III (Democratic-Farmer-Labor). After his victory, bumper stickers and T-shirts bearing the slogan &quot;My governor can beat up your governor&quot; appeared in Minnesota. The nickname &quot;Jesse 'The Mind'&quot; (from a last-minute Hillsman ad featuring Ventura posing as Rodin's Thinker) began to resurface sarcastically in reference to his frequently controversial remarks. Ventura's old stage name &quot;Jesse 'The Body'&quot; (sometimes adapted to &quot;Jesse 'The Governing Body'&quot;) also continued to appear with some regularity.
After the legislature refused to increase spending for security, Ventura attracted criticism when he decided not to live in the governor's mansion during his tenure, choosing instead to shut it down and stay at his home in Maple Grove. Critics pointed to the loss of jobs for several working-class people at the mansion and the extra cost of reopening the mansion later.41
In 1999, a group of disgruntled citizens petitioned to recall Governor Ventura, alleging, among other things, that &quot;the use of state security personnel to protect the governor on a book promotion tour constituted illegal use of state property for personal gain.&quot; The petition was denied. 42
During his tenure as Governor, Ventura drew frequent fire from the press in the Twin Cities. He referred to reporters as &quot;media jackals,&quot; a term that even appeared on the press passes required to enter the governor's press area.43 Shortly after Ventura's election as governor, author and humorist Garrison Keillor wrote a satirical book about the event, spoofing Ventura as &quot;Jimmy (Big Boy) Valente,&quot; a self-aggrandizing former &quot;Navy W.A.L.R.U.S. (Water Air Land Rising Up Suddenly)&quot; turned professional wrestler turned politician. Initially, Ventura responded angrily to the satire, but later, in a conciliatory vein, said that Keillor &quot;makes Minnesota proud&quot;.44 During his term, Ventura appeared on The Late Show with David Letterman, in which he responded controversially to the following question: &quot;So which is the better city of the Twin Cities, Minneapolis or St. Paul?&quot;. Ventura responded, &quot;Minneapolis. Those streets in St. Paul must have been designed by drunken Irishmen&quot;. He later apologized for the remark, adding that it was not intended to be taken seriously.45
After a trade mission to China in 2002, he announced that he would not run for a second term.46 He accused the media of hounding him and his family for personal behavior and belief while neglecting coverage of important policy issues. Ventura later told a reporter for The Boston Globe that he would have run for a second term if he had been single, citing the media's effect on his family life.47

Governor Ventura sparked media criticism when, nearing the end of his term, he suggested that he might resign from office early to allow his lieutenant governor, Mae Schunk, an opportunity to serve as governor. He further stated that he wanted her to be the state's first female governor and have her portrait painted and hung in the Capitol along with the other governors. Ventura quickly retreated from the comments, saying he was just floating an idea.48
Political positions

Ventura's main campaign promise was a tax refund. The state was running a budget surplus at the time, and Ventura believed that the money should be given back to the public. In political debates, he often admitted that he had not formed an opinion on certain policy questions. Ventura frequently described himself as &quot;fiscally conservative and socially liberal.&quot; He selected teacher Mae Schunk as his running mate. His participation in the 1998 Minnesota Governor debates boosted his popularity as a candidate.
Later as governor, he came to support a unicameral (one-house) legislature, light rail public transport, property tax reform, gay rights, and abortion rights. In an interview on The Howard Stern Show, he affirmed his support of gay rights, including gay marriage and gays in the military, stating he would've gladly served alongside homosexuals when he was in the Navy as they would've provided less competition for women.49 While funding public school education generously, he opposed the teachers' union, and did not have a high regard for the public funding of higher education institutions. Additionally, Ventura supported the use of medicinal marijuana, advocated a higher role for third parties in national politics, and favored the concept of instant-runoff voting.
Lacking a party base in the Minnesota House and Senate, Governor Ventura's policy ambitions had little chance of being introduced as bills. Initially, the residents of Minnesota feared Governor Ventura's vetoes would be overturned. Ventura vetoed 45 bills in his first year, and only 3 of those vetoes were overridden. The reputation for having his vetoes overridden comes from his fourth and final year, where 6 of his 9 vetoes were overturned.50
Ventura was elected on a Reform party ticket, but he never received support from Ross Perot's Texas faction. When the Reform party was taken over by Pat Buchanan supporters before the presidential elections of 2000, Ventura left the party in February 2000, referring to it as 'hopelessly dysfunctional'. However, he maintained close ties to the Independence Party of Minnesota, which also broke from the Reform party around the same time.
During the first part of his administration, Ventura strongly advocated for land-use reform and substantial mass transit improvements, such as light rail. In his March 1999 State address, he proclaimed, &quot;I want to ride a train by 2002,&quot; referring to a light rail line running between downtown Minneapolis and the Mall of America. He made the light rail project a priority, obtaining additional funding from the Minnesota state legislature to keep the project moving. The Hiawatha Line was completed in 2004.
Ventura vetoed a bill to require recitation of the Pledge of Allegiance in public schools, saying:


''' 


During another trade mission to Cuba in the summer of 2002, he denounced the economic sanctions of the US against that country.51
Wellstone memorial
Ventura greatly disapproved of some of the actions that took place at the 2002 memorial for Senator Paul Wellstone, his family, and others who died in a plane crash on October 25, 2002. Ventura said, &quot;I feel used. I feel violated and duped over the fact that [the memorial ceremony] turned into a political rally&quot;.5253 He left halfway through the controversial speech made by Wellstone's best friend, Rick Kahn. Ventura had initially planned to appoint a Democrat to Wellstone's seat,54 but he instead appointed Dean Barkley to represent Minnesota in the Senate until Wellstone's term expired in January 2003.
Statements
Religion
In a Playboy interview, he said, &quot;Organized religion is a sham and a crutch for weak-minded people who need strength in numbers. It tells people to go out and stick their noses in other people's business.&quot; In his 1999 best-selling memoir I Ain't Got Time to Bleed, Ventura responded to the controversy sparked by these remarks by elaborating on his views concerning religion: &quot;I&lt;U+2019&gt;d like to clarify [my comments published in Playboy] about religious people being weak-minded. I didn&lt;U+2019&gt;t mean all religious people. I don&lt;U+2019&gt;t have any problem with the vast majority of religious folks. I count myself among them, more or less. But I believe because it makes sense to me, not because I think it can be proven. There are lots of people out there who think they know the truth about God and religion, but does anybody really know for sure? That&lt;U+2019&gt;s why the founding fathers built freedom of religious belief into the structure of this nation, so that everybody could make up their minds for themselves. But I do have a problem with the people who think they have some right to try to impose their beliefs on others. I hate what the fundamentalist fanatics are doing to our country. It seems as though, if everybody doesn&lt;U+2019&gt;t accept their version of reality, that somehow invalidates it for them. Everybody must believe the same things they do. That&lt;U+2019&gt;s what I find weak and destructive.&quot;55
Ventura endorsed equal rights for religious minorities, as well as people who don't believe in God, by declaring July 4, 2002, &quot;Indivisible Day&quot; through this proclamation:
 Governor Ventura proclaimed October 13&lt;U+2013&gt;19, 2002 as &quot;Christian Heritage Week&quot; in Minnesota.5657
Prostitution
Ventura has publicly stated that prostitution should be legal, since it will exist in any case, and legal controls protecting the health of clients and workers are needed.58 He said &quot;I voted in hopes to make prostitution legal once, and I'd do it again in a second.&quot;59
Other media
Between 1995 and his run for governor in 1998, Ventura had radio call-in shows on (KFAN 1130) and (KSTP 1500) in Minneapolis &lt;U+2013&gt; Saint Paul. Jesse had a brief role on the television soap opera The Young and the Restless in 1999.
Ventura has been criticized for privately profiting from his heightened popularity. He was hired as a television analyst for the failed XFL football enterprise, served as a referee at a World Wrestling Federation match, and published several books during his tenure as governor. On his weekly radio show, he often criticized the media for focusing on these deals rather than on his policy proposals.60
Post-gubernatorial life

Ventura was succeeded in his office by Republican Tim Pawlenty. He began a cable television show in October 2003, on MSNBC called Jesse Ventura's America. The show was broadcast once a week, on Saturdays, unlike many MSNBC shows which are on five nights a week (this show was originally planned for five nights a week as well, but MSNBC executives changed their minds). At the time of its airing, Jesse Ventura's America was the only national television show filmed in Minnesota. Among his guests were Charles Barkley, Gray Davis, Arianna Huffington, Rob Kampia, and Kathy McKee.
In 2004, fellow Navy veteran and Harvard graduate student Christopher Mora promoted the idea that the academic establishment had failed to reach out to citizens experienced in public service, but who did not fit the traditional idea of a politician. He successfully lobbied for the selection of Ventura, who started teaching a study group at Harvard University for the Spring 2004 semester as a visiting fellow at the Kennedy School of Government's Institute of Politics (IOP). His 90-minute study group focused on third party politics, campaign finance, the war on drugs, and other relevant political issues. Ventura scheduled multiple famous friends to appear for his seminars including Dean Barkley and Richard Marcinko.
On October 22, 2004, with Ventura by his side, former Maine Governor Angus King endorsed John Kerry for President at the Minnesota state capitol building. Ventura did not speak at the press conference. When prodded for a statement, Governor King responded, &quot;He plans to vote for John Kerry, but he doesn't want to make a statement and subject himself to the tender mercies of the Minnesota press&quot;.61
In November 2004, an advertisement began airing in California featuring Ventura. In it, Ventura voices his opposition to Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger's policies regarding Native American casinos. Like Hogan, Schwarzenegger at one point was also a close friend of Ventura as well, but since Schwarzenegger's victory in California, Ventura has not reportedly given him any praise; Schwarzenegger didn't even mention Ventura's name in an interview with Fox News in 2005, where reporter Chris Wallace asked him if he was &quot;the next Jesse Ventura&quot;.62 Ventura is serving as an advisory board member for a new group called Operation Truth, a non-profit organization set up &quot;to give voice to troops who served in Iraq.&quot; &lt;U+201C&gt;The current use of the National Guard is wrong....These are men who did not sign up to go occupy foreign nations&lt;U+201D&gt;.63
In August 2005, Ventura became the spokesperson for BetUS, an online Sportsbook.64 In 2005, Ventura repeatedly discussed leaving the United States. In September 2005, Ventura announced on The Mike Malloy Show that he was leaving the U.S. and planned to &quot;have an adventure&quot;. In late October 2005, he went on the The Big Idea with Donny Deutsch and reiterated that he was leaving the U.S. due to, among other things, censorship. He has since moved to Baja California, Mexico.
In September 2006, Ventura endorsed and campaigned with independent Texas gubernatorial candidate Kinky Friedman, and Independence Party of Minnesota 's gubernatorial candidate Peter Hutchinson and Team Minnesota. He revealed he now spends much of his time surfing near his home in Mexico.
In April 2008, a book authored by Ventura, titled Don't Start the Revolution Without Me was released. In it, Ventura describes a hypothetical campaign in which he is a candidate for President of the United States in 2008, running as an independent. In an interview with the Associated Press at the time of the book's release, however, Ventura denied any plans for a presidential bid, stating that the scenario is only imaginary and not indicative of a &quot;secret plan to run&quot;.65 On MinnPost.com, Ventura's agent, Steve Schwartz, describes the book thus: &quot;[Ventura is revealing] why he left politics and discussing the disastrous war in Iraq, why he sees our two-party system as corrupt, and what Fidel Castro told him about who was really behind the assassination of President Kennedy.&quot;66
However, in an interview on CNN's The Situation Room on April 7, Ventura hinted that he was considering entering the race for the United States Senate seat then held by Norm Coleman, his Republican opponent in the 1998 Gubernatorial race.67 A poll commissioned by Twin Cities station Fox 9 put him at 24 percent, behind Al Franken at 32 percent and Norm Coleman at 39 percent in a hypothetical three-way race. However, Ventura announced on Larry King Live on July 14, 2008 that he would not run.68
He spoke at former Republican presidential candidate Ron Paul's &quot;Rally for the Republic&quot;, organized by the Campaign for Liberty, on September 2, 2008. At the event, Ventura implied a possible future run at the U.S. Presidency. Ventura stated before a live audience that &quot;If America proves itself worthy, in 2012 we'll give them a race they'll never forget!&quot;
TV Week is reporting that Ventura is in negotiations with 20th Television to host a half-hour court show that would debut in the fall of 2009.69
On December 2, 2009, Ventura appeared on the Opie and Anthony show, where he expressed doubt about the U.S. government's account of the September 11 attacks. The conversation with Jim Norton grew heated and Ventura walked out of the show.7071
Bush/Cheney administration and torture
In a May 11, 2009 interview with Larry King, Ventura twice stated that George W. Bush was the worst president of his lifetime, adding &quot;President Obama inherited something I wouldn't wish on my worst enemy. You know? Two wars, an economy that's borderline depression.&quot;72 On the issue of waterboarding, Ventura added'''''': Ventura then stated that he had no respect for Dick Cheney because he is &quot;a guy who got five deferments from the Vietnam War. Clearly, he's a coward. He wouldn't go when it was his time to go. And now he is a chickenhawk. Now he is this big tough guy who wants this hardcore policy. And he's the guy that sanctioned all this torture by calling it 'enhanced interrogation'.&quot;73 Ventura also expressed interest in being appointed ambassador to Cuba should U.S. relations with Cuba continue to improve.74 On a May 18, 2009 appearance on The View, Ventura asked Elisabeth Hasselbeck if waterboarding is acceptable, why were not Oklahoma City bombers, Timothy McVeigh and Terry Nichols waterboarded. &quot;We only seem to waterboard Muslims.&quot;75 Comparing the waterboarding of detainees to the North Vietnamese torture of American P.O.W.s, Ventura asserted, &quot;We created our own Hanoi Hilton in Guant&lt;U+00E1&gt;namo. That's our Hanoi Hilton.&quot;76 &quot;'Enhanced interrogation' is Dick Cheney changing a word. Dick Cheney changed a word to cover his ass.&quot;77 On May 20, 2009, Ventura appeared on Fox &amp; Friends. When Brian Kilmeade told Ventura that he would stop supporting waterboarding when &quot;they're dead.&quot; Ventura responded, &quot;Really? Have you enlisted? Have you enlisted or are you just talking?... Go walk the walk, don't talk the talk.&quot;78 After Ventura quoted Thomas Jefferson in saying that dissent is the highest form of patriotism, Kilmeade walked off the set.
Questions regarding 9/11
In April and May 2008, Jesse Ventura, in several radio interviews for his new book, Don't Start the Revolution Without Me, expressed concerns about what he described as some of the unanswered questions of the September 11 attacks.79 His remarks about the possibility that the World Trade Center was demolished with explosives were also repeated in newspaper and television stories following some of the interviews.80
Ventura was interviewed on the Alex Jones radio show on April 2, 2008, on Opie and Anthony on April 8, 2008, and on the The Howard Stern Show on May 21, 2008, discussing his views on 9/11 with the shows' hosts.81 He said that he felt that many unanswered questions remain, and he believes that World Trade Center Building 7, which was not struck by a plane, collapsed on the afternoon of 9/11 in a manner which resembled a well executed controlled demolition82 Ventura stated:

He also states the Twin Towers appeared to be pulverized to dust, that they fell at virtually free-fall speed, and that no other massive steel-framed buildings had ever collapsed in this manner due to fire before.83
'On May 18, 2009, when asked by Sean Hannity of Fox News, how George W. Bush could have avoided the attacks of September 11, 2001, Ventura answered, &quot;Well, you pay attention to memos on August 6th that tell you exactly what bin Laden's gonna do.&quot;&lt;Bold text'ref&gt;Jesse Ventura, Hannity Go Head-To-Head
Conspiracy Theory with Jesse Ventura
In August 2009, it was announced that Ventura would host TruTV's new show Conspiracy Theory with Jesse Ventura.84 &quot;Ventura will hunt down answers, plunging viewers into a world of secret meetings, midnight surveillance, shifty characters and dark forces,&quot; truTV said in a statement. On the program, which debuted on December 2, 2009, Ventura travels the country, investigating cases and getting input from believers and skeptics before passing judgment on a theory's validity.85 According to TruTV, the first episode drew 1.6 million viewers, a record for a new series on the network.
On the show which aired the evening of 23 Dec 2009, host Jesse Ventura said:

Personal life
In 1975, Ventura married his wife Terry. The couple have two grown children: a son, Tyrel (b. 1980), who is a movie and television director and producer,86 and a daughter, Jade (b. 1983).87
During his wrestling days, Ventura used anabolic steroids. He admitted this after retiring from competition, and went on to make public service announcements and appear in printed ads and on posters warning young people about the potential dangers and potential health risks of abusing steroids.88
In 2002, Ventura was hospitalized for a severe blood clot in his lungs, the same kind of injury that ended his wrestling career.89
Electoral history

1998 election for Governor

Jesse Ventura (Ref.), 37%
Norm Coleman (R), 34%
Hubert H. Humphrey III (DFL), 28%


Wrestling

Finishing moves

Body Breaker909192 (WWF) / Inverted bearhug93 (AWA)
Overhead gutwrench backbreaker rack



Nicknames

&quot;The Great&quot;94
&quot;The Body&quot;9596
&quot;The Mouth&quot;9798
&quot;The Mind&quot;
&quot;The Actor&quot;99
&quot;The Governor&quot;100


Championships and accomplishments

American Wrestling Association

AWA World Tag Team Championship (1 time) &lt;U+2013&gt; with Adrian Adonis101102



Cauliflower Alley Club

Iron Mike Mazurki Award (1999)



Central States Wrestling

NWA World Tag Team Championship (Central States version) (1 time) &lt;U+2013&gt; with Tank Patton103



Continental Wrestling Association

AWA Southern Heavyweight Championship (2 times)104



International Wrestling Institute and Museum

Frank Gotch Award (2003)



NWA Mid-Pacific Promotions

NWA Hawaii Tag Team Championship (1 time) &lt;U+2013&gt; with Steve Strong105



Pacific Northwest Wrestling

NWA Pacific Northwest Heavyweight Championship (2 times)106107
NWA Pacific Northwest Tag Team Championship (5 times) &lt;U+2013&gt; with Bull Ramos (2), Buddy Rose (2) and Jerry Oates (1)108109



Pro Wrestling Illustrated

PWI ranked him #239 of the 500 best singles wrestlers during the &quot;PWI Years&quot; in 2003
PWI ranked him #67 of the 100 best tag teams of the &quot;PWI Years&quot; with Adrian Adonis



World Wrestling Entertainment

WWE Hall of Fame (Class of 2004)110


Books

I Ain't Got Time to Bleed: Reworking the Body Politic from the Bottom Up (ISBN 978-0451200860)
Do I Stand Alone?: Going to the Mat Against Political Pawns and Media Jackals (ISBN 978-0743405874)
Jesse Ventura Tells It Like It Is: America's Most Outspoken Governor Speaks Out About Government (co-authored with Heron Marquez) (ISBN 978-0822503859)
Don't Start the Revolution Without Me! (co-authored with Dick Russell) (ISBN 978-1602392731)
American Conspiracies (co-authored with Dick Russell)

Notes

References

deFiebre, Conrad. &quot;Record-high job approval for Ventura; Many Minnesotans like his style, don't mind moonlighting.&quot; Star Tribune 22 July 1999: 1A+.
deFiebre, Conrad. &quot;Using body language, Ventura backs Kerry.&quot; Star Tribune 23 October 2004: 1A+.
Kahn, Joseph P. &quot;The Body Politic.&quot; The Boston Globe 25 February 2004. Accessed April 28, 2004.
Olson, Rochelle and Bob von Sternberg. &quot;GOP demands equal time; Wellstone aide apologizes; Ventura upset.&quot; Minneapolis Star-Tribune 31 October 2002: 1A+.

External links




WWE Hall of Fame Profile


Ventura &quot;on the issues&quot;
Analysis of Jesse Ventura's Playboy interview by Aubrey Immelman
Jesse Ventura - Media Man Australia profile
Election Of Bonapartist Figure Ventura In Minnesota Is Danger To Working People - article in The Militant 1998.
Radiotapes.com Recordings of Jesse Ventura for Governor commercials from 1998 (scroll down to Misc Recordings).
Larry King Live: Jesse Ventura CNN April 1, 2008
&quot;Jesse's back! New Ventura book 'Revolution' will cover political waterfront&quot; from Minnpost.com
The Jesse Ventura Forums
Jesse Ventura on Wrestling-Radio.com
Jesse Ventura interview, Diaday.com
Jesse Ventura on The Young Turks Show.








cs:Jesse Ventura de:Jesse Ventura fa:&lt;U+062C&gt;&lt;U+0633&gt;&lt;U+06CC&gt; &lt;U+0648&gt;&lt;U+0646&gt;&lt;U+0686&gt;&lt;U+0648&gt;&lt;U+0631&gt;&lt;U+0627&gt; fr:Jesse Ventura it:Jesse Ventura nl:Jesse Ventura ja:&lt;U+30B8&gt;&lt;U+30A7&gt;&lt;U+30B7&gt;&lt;U+30FC&gt;&lt;U+30FB&gt;&lt;U+30D9&gt;&lt;U+30F3&gt;&lt;U+30C1&gt;&lt;U+30E5&gt;&lt;U+30E9&gt; pl:Jesse Ventura pt:Jesse Ventura fi:Jesse Ventura sv:Jesse Ventura vi:Jesse Ventura
Category:Actors from Minnesota Category:American actor-politicians Category:American athlete-politicians Category:American film actors Category:American libertarians Category:American memoirists Category:American military personnel of the Vietnam War Category:American professional wrestlers Category:American talk radio hosts Category:American television sports announcers Category:German-American actors Category:Governors of Minnesota Category:Hungarian-American actors Category:Hungarian-American politicians Category:Mayors of places in Minnesota Category:Mongols (motorcycle club) Category:Minneapolis, Minnesota radio personalities Category:Professional wrestling announcers Category:Reform Party (United States) politicians Category:Tampa Bay Buccaneers broadcasters Category:United States Navy sailors Category:WWE Hall of Fame Category:1951 births Category:Living people



↩

↩
April 1, 2008, in Larry King interview with Ventura on NBC↩


One on One with Jesse Ventura↩
OUTLAW GANGS: Northern Nevada eyes biker enmity↩
Jesse Ventura PBS↩


John Molinaro, The Top 100 Pro Wrestlers of All Time, (Winding Stair Press: 2002), page 199↩










↩


Jake Tapper, &quot;Body Slam: The Jesse Ventura Story,&quot; pg. 104-105↩

Jesse Ventura, &quot;I Ain't Got Time To Bleed pg. 108↩


Ventura v. Titan Sports, Inc.↩






Jake Tapper, &quot;Body Slam: The Jesse Ventura Story,&quot; pg. 105-108↩
↩
↩
↩
In Re Proposed Petition to Recall Governor Jesse Ventura http://wrestlingperspective.com/legal/ventura.html↩
↩
↩
↩

↩
↩
http://www.howardstern.com/rundown.hs?d=1242705600#14047↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
http://www.highbeam.com/doc/1P1-69252006.html↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
BetUs Events↩
Freed, Joshua.&quot;Ventura:No Plans to Run Again, but...&quot;, Associated Press. Accessed on April 1, 2008↩
Jesse's back! New Ventura book 'Revolution' will cover political waterfront, MinnPost.com↩
Jesse Ventura Running For The Senate?!, YouTube↩
↩
Ventura In Talks To Host Court Show, WCCO.com↩
http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2009/12/02/jesse-ventura-storms-out_n_377780.html↩
↩
Jesse Ventura: You Give Me a Water Board, Dick Cheney and One Hour, and I'll Have Him Confess to the Sharon Tate Murders, CrooksAndLiars.com↩

http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ujv-x6wGoGA↩
Ventura And Hasselbeck Rumble Over Waterboarding On The View↩


Jesse Ventura Lays Waste To Fox And Friends↩
Jesse The Body Sounds Off, howardstern.com, May21, 2008↩
Ventura says he regrets initial acceptance of 9/11 explanations, Associated Press, April 3, 2008↩
Watson, Paul Joseph. Former Governor Jesse Ventura: WTC Collapse A Controlled Demolition, www.prisonplanet.com. Accessed on April 3, 2008↩
Ventura Regrets Not Being More Skeptical Over 9/11. Retrieved on April 8, 2008.↩

http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2008/09/30/jesse-ventura-working-on_n_130477.html↩
&quot;TruTv:Conspiracy Theory with Jesse Ventura&quot;, www.turner.com. Retrieved on November 4, 2009.↩
Imbd:Tyrel Ventura, www.imdb.com.↩
↩
↩
↩


↩









↩

↩
↩




↩


