
Hunts Cross railway station is a railway station in Hunts Cross, Liverpool, England. It is situated on the southern branch of the City Line's Liverpool to Manchester route, and is the southern terminus of Merseyrail's Northern Line.
History
Originally built by the Cheshire Lines Committee, Hunts Cross was the only four-platform station on the line running between Liverpool Central and Manchester Central stations. It was also a junction at the southern end of the North Liverpool Extension Line to Gateacre, West Derby, north Liverpool docks and Southport. This line was closed in stages from 1952 to 1972 and is now part of National Cycle Network Route 62, the Trans Pennine Trail. The closure of the North Liverpool route left Hunts Cross to be served by the local service from Liverpool Lime Street to Warrington and Manchester.
In 1983 Merseyrail's electrified Northern Line from Liverpool Central was extended to Hunts Cross from its previous terminus at Garston. One of the former Gateacre line platforms was reinstated as a bay platform for terminating electric services. Northern Line trains originally ran through to Kirkby, but in 1984 the timetable was altered and trains continued to Southport instead.
When the Merseyrail service was introduced, the service from Liverpool Lime Street to Manchester was cut back to terminate at Hunts Cross. Passengers from Manchester wishing to continue to Liverpool had to change to a Merseyrail train. This arrangement was short-lived and ended in 1989 when the through trains to Lime Street were restored.
From 11 June 2006, the number of Manchester-bound trains stopping at Hunts Cross was reduced from two trains per hour to one. However, during morning and evening peaks the half-hourly frequency is still maintained.
From 11 December 2006, the Monday-Saturday evening Northern Line service was increased to run every 15 minutes. Previously, services had reduced to a half-hourly frequency after 7.30pm.
Current services

Northern Rail unit 142031 in Platform 2 on a Manchester Oxford Road service.

Hunts Cross is primarily served by Northern Rail services on the City Line between Liverpool Lime Street and Warrington Central and Manchester Oxford Road (one train per hour with additional services during peak hours), and Merseyrail Northern Line services from Southport via Liverpool Central (every 15 minutes Monday to Saturday, reducing to half-hourly on Sundays).

Northern Rail services to Manchester call at:





Halewood, Hough Green, Widnes, Sankey for Penketh, Warrington Central, Birchwood, Irlam, Chassen Road, Urmston, Humphrey Park and Manchester Oxford Road





Northern Rail services to Liverpool call at:





Liverpool South Parkway, West Allerton, Mossley Hill, Edge Hill and Liverpool Lime Street





Merseyrail services to Southport call at:





Liverpool South Parkway, Cressington, Aigburth, St Michaels, Brunswick, Liverpool Central, Moorfields, Bank Hall, Bootle Oriel Road, Bootle New Strand, Seaforth &amp; Litherland, Waterloo, Blundellsands &amp; Crosby, Hall Road, Hightown, Formby,Freshfield, Ainsdale, Hillside, Birkdale, and Southport




In addition, some peak-hour services operated by East Midlands Trains and First TransPennine Express additionally stop here between Liverpool, Manchester and beyond.

Hunts Cross station currently has three operational platforms.

Northern Rail services bound for Liverpool Lime Street (Merseyrail City Line).
Northern Rail services bound for Warrington Central and Manchester Oxford Road (Merseyrail City Line).
Merseyrail services bound for Liverpool Central and Southport (Merseyrail Northern Line).

The track serving platform 2 is also electrified and can be used by Merseyrail EMUs if the usual platform is blocked. This facility is used rarely, as any terminating train in this platform will block the through line towards Manchester, with potential delays to other services.
Layout
The station is in a cutting and is reached by stepped ramps from the ticket office. A building on the Southport/Manchester-bound (island) platform (platforms 2&amp;3) contains a disabled toilet, a snack shop and waiting room. The former main station building has been converted into a bar/restaurant and has been replaced by a modern ticket office. A small car park is available, and bus stops are nearby.
External links


Station information from Merseyrail











Category:Grade II listed buildings in Liverpool Category:Railway stations in Liverpool Category:Grade II listed railway stations Category:Railway stations served by Merseyrail Category:Railway stations served by East Midlands Trains Category:Railway stations served by First TransPennine Express Category:Railway stations served by Northern Rail
