
Scavenger is the name of several fictional characters in the Transformers universes. Scavenger is usually depicted as a villain who turns into a construction vehicle.
Transformers: Generation 1

Scavenger is a member of the Constructicons who turns into an excavator.1 He combines with the other Constructicons to form the combiner robot Devastator.23
Scavenger is an unashamedly pathetic Decepticon. Desperate to prove his worth to his team-mates, he uses his one true gift - his shovel's ability to detect various magnetic, ionic, electrical or gas readings - to locate items of value, although invariably, all he can usually find is junk. He transforms into an excavator, and the right arm of Devastator.
A recolor of the Scavenger toy was sold in Europe which didn't have a given name and didn't combine with his fellow Constructicons.
Marvel Comics
The origins of the Constructicons in Marvel Comics' Transformers series was not nearly so complicated. Seeking to bolster the size of his forces on Earth in 1985, Decepticon Commander Shockwave arranged for the construction of six new Decepticon bodies, which were then infused with life by the power of the Creation Matrix, tapped from the head of the imprisoned Optimus Prime. Thus, the Constructicons were born, and were immediately put to work building a massive radio transmission dish that Soundwave used to beam a message to Cybertron. When the Autobots attempted to interfere, the Constructicons revealed their hidden power and merged into Devastator to fight them off, allowing the message to successfully go through.
Scavenger made an appearance in the Decepticon forces under the command of Megatron in issue #7 of the Marvel Generation 2 comic series, in a story called &quot;New Dawn.&quot; Megatron lead his Decepticons against Jhiaxus' second generation Cybertronians near the moon of Tykos. The Decepticons were defeated and Megatron left injured, presumed dead, but swearing revenge.4
Animated series
Scavenger first appeared in the season 1 episode &quot;Heavy Metal War&quot;. Originally to be named Scrounge, Scavenger was erroneously referred to by this name once in the Constructicons' debut animated series episode. He appears in The Transformers: The Movie. He was with the Decepticons when they ambushed the Autobot shuttle. He kills Prowl with a single blast from his gun.
Books
Scavenger appeared in the 1986 Ballantine Books story The Invisibility Factor by Josepha Sherman.5
Dreamwave Productions
When civil war broke out on the planet Cybertron between the Autobots and Decepticons, Scavenger joined up with the Decepticons under Megatron.
Scavenger and the Constructions were successful in designing the first combiner, when they designed a united form for themselves called Devastator.
When Megatron and Autobot leader Optimus Prime disappeared in an accident with a space bridge, the Autobot and Decepticon forces splintered into smaller factions. The Constructicons joined up with the Ultracons under the leadership of Ratbat.
When the Constructicons came with Earth they were reformatted into Earth-like construction vehicles.
Fun Publications
The Transformers Classics comics published in the Official Transformers Collectors Club magazine is set in the Marvel Comics continuity, but in a timeline where the events of Generation 2 did not occur. The story occurs fifteen years after Megatron was presumed dead in the crash of the Ark. Megatron survived, and eventually upgraded his body (based on his Classics toy) and gathered many other Decepticons to him. Soundwave helped him in recovering the body of Astrotrain, who was then used to help locate the placement of other fallen Decepticons around the globe. Those who joined Megatron included Laserbeak, Ramjet, Ravage, Skywarp, Soundwave, Starscream and the Constructicons). Megatron also reactivated Thrust, Dirge and Thundercracker, but the three left him to join up with Bludgeon's troops - mostly because they couldn't work with Starscream, who had killed them once. Megatron's based his command from the wreck of the Ark in the Yukon, where he keeps the fallen body of Ratchet as a trophy and the severed, but living, head of Shockwave as an advisor.
In the Transformers: Timelines story &quot;Games of Deception&quot; by Fun Publications Scavenger appears among Megatrons troops.
Toys

Generation 1 Scavenger (1985)



Based on a Diaclone toy.



Generation 2 Scavenger (yellow) (1993)



Generation 1 Scavenger was recolored in yellow.6



Generation 2 Scavenger (orange) (1993)



Generation 1 Scavenger was recolored in orange.



CybCon Scavenger (2001)



An exclusive redeco available at CybCon 2001 was Scavenger. This was a hand repainted from Beast Machines Scavenger done as a homage to Generation 1 Scavenger.7



Classics Deluxe Scavenger (2007)



The Energon Steamhammer toy was repainted and given the name Scavenger in the Wal-Mart exclusive Constructicon package, along with Steamhammer's Energon teammates, repainted into four of Scavenger's fellow Constructicons.


Beast Wars

The name Scavenger reappeared in Beast Wars as a Predacon transmetal ant that was able to turn into a drilling vehicle.
He was meant to be a transmetal upgrade version of Inferno, as is obvious from his tech specs, but was renamed in the U.S.
His bio indicates that his transmetal body now provides him with drill arms he uses to travel underground and ambush unwary Maximals from below.
Animated series
Scavenger(as Inferno)'s stasis pod was presumably among those who were launched into orbit around prehistoric Earth in the Beast Wars series pilot.
IDW Publishing
Scavenger (as a separate character from Inferno) eventually appeared in the IDW Publishing Beast Wars comics as a protoform turned into a Predacon by Magmatron. He was sent to dispose of Razorbeast and his small band, but the attack was interrupted by a much larger force of Maximals. During the battle, Scavenger got his teeth re-organized, courtesy of Bonecrusher's fist. After the battle, if he survived, he presumably regrouped with Ravage and the rest of the Predacons.
He appears among the Predacons on the cover of the first issue of the sequel story Beast Wars: The Ascending.
Scavenger had a biography printed in the Beast Wars Sourcebook by IDW Publishing.8
Toys

Beast Wars Mega Scavenger



There are two variants of Scavenger released in the U.S. The earlier releases had his name printed on his leg, while later releases had the name on his abdomen.9

In Japan Scavenger was the transmetal upgrade of Beast Wars Inferno, and was available by himself or packaged together with the Maximal Depth Charge.


{{-}}
Beast Machines

Scavenger was a Basic-sized Vehicon which transformed into a Cybertronian Demolitions Vehicle. He did not appear in the TV series, nor is he related to any previous Transformer with the name Scavenger. Scavenger-style drones appeared among the Vehicons in the Transformer: Universe: Wreckers comic.10
Counted among the tank-type Vehicons, Scavenger is a powerhouse, crushing his enemies with brute force and very little subtlety - and he loves it. Commanded by Tankor and armed with deadly electricity claws, Scavenger loves little more than what he was created for: pure destruction.
3H Enterprises
The Scavenger drones would appear in the Transformers: Universe-Wreckers storyline under the command of Quake and Blastcharge, who had been ordered by Megatron to hunt down the Wreckers. In the subsequent battle, most of the drones were destroyed by the Wreckers.
Toys

Beast Machines Basic Scavenger



A new mold.


{{-}}
Transformers: Robots in Disguise

Being a Hasbro only release, he did not appear in the Transformers: Robots in Disguise anime series. This toy did not receive any official bio from Hasbro either, so it is unknown who he is and what his personality is like.
Toys

Robots In Disguise Basic Scavenger (2002)



The Beast Machines Scavenger figure was recolored into an Autobot; as such, he was the first Autobot with the name Scavenger. Bundled with Mirage GT and Nightcruz.11


{{-}}
Transformers: Armada

The second Autobot to bear the name Scavenger, he is painted as a homage to the Generation 1 Constructicons, and is called Devastar in Japan, the Japanese name of Devastator. His Decepticon appearance and name relates to his undercover work.12
Armada series
Scavenger made his first appearance in the show as a bounty hunter. One could suppose that his enormous strength and exceptional fighting skill were already well-known to all the Transformers because Megatron himself requested his services and promised to reward him handsomely if he assisted him to obtain the Star Saber (much to the other Decepticons' displeasure). Scavenger helped Megatron to gather the Skyboom Shield up. Also he confronted Hot Shot in the several battles and defeated him easily, though the young warrior wielded the Star Saber. It seemed that Scavenger was a dangerous rogue who was in alliance with the Decepticons, but this was called into question when he later saved Hot Shot from being destroyed by the Decepticons when the latter has been abandoned by Sideways on the Moon. The truth was finally revealed, and it turned out that Scavenger was, in fact, actually an Autobot spying on the Decepticons. However, not all the 'Bots were friendly disposed towards him, and some of them, like Smokescreen, considered him being a traitor. But soon those who mistrusted Scavenger had to acknowledge themselves wrong when he saved Optimus Prime's life during just another battle with the Decepticons.
The main features of Scavenger's character were his self-possession and independency. When being among the 'Cons, he allowed himself to have the sly digs at Megatron himself, and the Decepticons' leader preferred to pay no attention to this. Later, when joining the 'Bots, he was the first who dared to take part of Starscream when the latter arrived to the A-Base after his breaking with the Decepticons. Indeed, Scavenger always did and said everything he considered his duty to do or to say, and he never took much care of what the others would think about him. Also Scavenger was known for his harsh personality, which was contrasted by his tendency to sleep when off-duty. He trained the Armada incarnation of Optimus Prime as well as Blurr and (over the course of the series), Hot Shot who, in his turn, conveyed his lessons to his own trainee Sideswipe.
Dreamwave Productions
Scavenger would also appear in the Dreamwave Productions' comic version of Armada. An Autobot from the very beginning, Scavenger was unable to stop the Decepticons from using the Mini-Cons to take over Cyber City. Later, when the Mini-Con distress beacon was activated, Scavenger accompanied Prime to Earth, battling Cyclonus and Starscream. He took part in many of the adventures on Earth, but nearly met his end after a full-scale Decepticon attack on the Autobot base in the wake of Optimus Prime's disappearance. With Smokescreen nearly killed by Megatron, Scavenger, along with Hot Shot and Red Alert attacked the Decepticon leader as he attempted to make a deal with Unicron, seemingly knocking him into Unicron's mouth and killing him.
Armada Scavenger continued to appear among the Autobots in the Transformers: Energon comic series by Dreamwave. His main appearance was in Issue #27 of the Energon Comic where he was one of the Autobots who volunteered to head to Earth to help battle the Terrorcon invasion.
Fun Publications
Scavenger appeared in the text story from Fun Publications called &quot;Force of Habit.&quot; This story explained where he was during the events of the Cybertron story. Ultra Magnus was the commander of various Autobot ships sent to other planets in search for the Cyber Planet Keys. Scavenger served as captain of the Die Cast which was sent to Zeta Persei.
Toys

Scavenger and Rollbar


Armada Ultra Scavenger with Rollbar



Armada Scavenger was repainted into Treadbolt.13


{{-}}
Transformers: Universe (Micromaster)

There are two Transformers: Universe toys called Scavenger. Neither of them have appeared in any official Transformers: Universe storyline. They appear similar to Generation One Scavenger, but without biographies or storyline they may or may not be the original Scavenger.
Toys

Generation 1 Digger (1992)



Packaged together with the other Sixbuilder members.14



Generation 1 Digger redeco (Autobot) (2003)



A redeco of the original mold.15



Generation 1 Differ redeco (Decepticon) (2003)



A redeco of Digger in green as a Decepticon.16



Universe Micromaster Scavenger (2004)



The first Universe Scavenger is a Decepticon redeco of the Japanese Micromaster combiner Digger, painted as a homage to Generation One Scavenger.


Transformers: Universe (Deluxe)

Transformers: Energon
Scavenger was the Takara name of the Transformers: Energon Decepticon Steamhammer.
Transformers: Timelines (Transtech)

Transtech Scavenger was among the concept characters for the proposed Transtech TV series.
After the Beast Machines line ended, Hasbro planned a follow-up series called Transtech. The Transtech concept was a line intended to take Transformers to their most futuristic. Hasbro commissioned sets of designs from Draxhall Jump. The series was supposedly to bring back some of the characters who died in Beast Wars along with some Generation 1 characters, all in new, more organic-looking bodies, though with vehicle alternate modes instead of the animals used in Beast Machines. Many concept sketches and even a few toy prototypes were made, but Hasbro scrapped the idea in favor of bringing Car Robots to their markets as Transformers: Robots in Disguise.
In the biography printed for Transtech Blackarachnia it is mentioned that he and Immorticon are Predacons from the same world what Blackarachnia, a Maximal, is from. They became stranded on Transtech Cybertron and joined up with Alpha Trion.
Fun Publications
Transtech Scavenger appeared among the troops of Alpha Trion in the story Transcendent by Fun Publications. He aided in the raid on Shockwave's lab to free Breakaway. The group then escaped through a dimensional portal to the Shattered Glass Cybertron.17
Scavenger appeared among Alpha Trion's troops in Reunification. {{-}}
Transformers: Revenge of the Fallen

Scavenger appears in the 2009 film Transformers: Revenge of the Fallen as one of the models of Constructicon, having the same alternate mode as Demolishor, though his robot mode isn't seen in the movie.18 Demolishor has more white in his color, while Scavenger is more red, but with all Demolishor's scenes occurring in the dark it is hard to tell in the film. Additionally most Demolishor toys were released in Scavenger's red deco.
Scavenger forms the torso of Devastator, along with Overload.
Scavenger stands about 86 feet tall to the top of his wheel.19
Movie plot
Scavenger is the largest Constructicon. Scavenger was seen transforming with the other Constructicons to form Devastator. He was presumably destroyed when Devastator was ripped apart by a rail gun.
Games
Scavenger is not a playable character in the video game but his combined form as Devastator's torso is seen. He is killed when the player defeats Devastator.
Toys

Revenge of the Fallen Legends Scavenger (2009)



A new mold. Can form robot or vehicle modes or combine into Devastator.20

This toy was initially sold individually in Japan, then as part of a 7 pack of Constructicons in the U.S.



Revenge of the Fallen Voyager Demolishor (2009)



Although released as Demolishor, the toy for Demolishor is color to more closely match Scavenger.



Revenge of the Fallen Combiner Scavenger (2009)



An excavator bundled with the other Constructicons. Can combine with the other toys to form Devastator, but has no individual robot mode. On the left side of Scavenger there are letters &quot;SCVNGR&quot;.


{{-}}
Transformers: Universe (Mini-Con)

Part of a Transformers: Universe Armada series 10-pack.21
Toys

Universe Armada Series Mini-Con Scavenger (2009)



A redeco of a Classics toy.


{{-}}
Transformers: Timelines (Shattered Glass)

This Scavenger is an alternate good version of the Generation 1 character from the &quot;Shattered Glass&quot; storyline, in which the Decepticons are on the side of good and the Autobots on the side of evil. Presumably like all Decepticons of his world, he is heroic and opposed to the evil Autobots.
Fun Publications
Scavenger appears in Reunification by Fun Publications where he helps repair damage Galvatron received in battle with Omega Doom.
Toys
Although no toy has been made for this version of Scavenger he seems to be based on the Generation 1 toy, but colored as a homage to the Generation 1 Protectobots, in white with red highlights. {{-}}
Transformers: Prime
Scavenger is a homage to the Revenge of the Fallen character of the same name.
Books
Scavenger appears as one of the Constructicons that combine to form Devastator in the novel Transformers: Exodus.
References




Category:Autobots Category:Decepticons Category:Fictional ants Category:Fictional construction workers Category:Fictional henchmen Category:Film characters Category:Micromasters Category:Mini-Cons Category:Predacons Category:Vehicons Category:Constructicons Category:Ultracons Category:Fictional robotic insects



Transformers: the fantasy, the fun, the future by Erin Brereton↩
↩
↩
http://www.seibertron.com/comics/view.php?comic_id=113↩
↩
Tomart's Action Figure Digest #7, 1992, page 9↩
Beast Machines Scavenger Repaints↩
http://www.monstersandcritics.com/books/comics/news/article_1343405.php/Creators_of_Transformers_Beast_Wars_The_Gathering_are_back↩
http://www.bwtf.com/bw/toys/reviews/scavenger/↩
http://www.bwtf.com/bm/toys/reviews/scavenger/↩
Ben's World of Transformers - Scavenger↩
http://www.bwtf.com/armada/toys/reviews/scavenger/↩
Scavenger - Transformers: Armada - Toy Gallery - Photos 1 - 25↩
http://www.tfu.info/1992/Cybertron/Digger/digger.htm↩
http://www.tfu.info/2003/Cybertron/Digger/digger.htm↩
http://www.tfu.info/2003/Destron/Digger/digger.htm↩
↩
http://www.usatoday.com/life/movies/news/2009-04-01-transformers-first-look_N.htm First look: Robo-brawlers big, small in new 'Transformers' By Anthony Breznican, USA TODAY↩
http://www.tfw2005.com/transformers-news/transformers-movie-just-movie-31/revenge-of-the-fallen-constructicons-size-comparison-168152/↩
http://www.toywizard.net/transformers-movie-ez-collection-dx-devastator-set/↩
http://www.tfw2005.com/boards/transformers-news-rumors/240766-rotf-arcee-bio-new-universe-minicon-10-pack.html↩


