

Benjamin Trinidad &quot;Kokoy&quot; Romualdez (September 24, 1930 &lt;U+2013&gt; February 21, 2012) was a Filipino politician who served as Governor of Leyte and later appointed as ambassador to the United States, China and Saudi Arabia.1
He was a younger brother to former First Lady Imelda Marcos and the father of Rep. Ferdinand Martin Romualdez.2
Personal life
The son of the late Vicente Orestes Romualdez, a former dean of the law school of St. Paul&lt;U+2019&gt;s College in Tacloban City, Kokoy Romualdez began his career in politics after serving as an assistant of then Speaker Daniel Romualdez from 1957 to 1961. He was a younger brother to former First Lady Imelda Marcos and the father of Rep. Ferdinand Martin Romualdez. He was married to Juliette Gomez and children, Daniel, a practicing architect in New York, and partner Michael; Benjamin Philip, president and chief executive officer of Benguet Corp., who is married to Inquirer president and CEO Maria Alexandra; Ferdinand Martin, who is married to Yedda Marie; Marean, an investment banker, and husband Thomas; sisters Imelda Marcos, Alita Martel, Conchita Yap and brothers Alfredo and Armando.
Political Life
Romualdez embarked on his own career in the diplomatic service and in politics spanning more than 20 years. He served several terms as Leyte governor. His brother-in-law, President Ferdinand Marcos appointed him as ambassador to China, Saudi Arabia and the United States while serving as Leyte governor until 1986, when his family went into exile following the People Power Revolution. He was later elected as a member of the Batasang Pambansa in 1984 but preferred to remain as ambassador to the United States, therefore was disqualified to sit in the parliament.
He was instrumental in the establishment of diplomatic relations between the Philippines and the People&lt;U+2019&gt;s Republic of China in the 1970s, becoming Manila&lt;U+2019&gt;s first ambassador to Beijing.
Known for his organizational skills, Romualdez paved the way for the state visits of President Marcos to various countries, including the United States.3
Death
He died on the afternoon of Wednesday 21 February, of cancer, at Makati Medical Center in Makati City, Philippines at the age of 81.
References




Category:1930 births Category:2012 deaths Category:Ambassadors of the Philippines to China Category:Ambassadors of the Philippines to Saudi Arabia Category:Ambassadors of the Philippines to the United States Category:Governors of Leyte Category:Imelda Marcos Category:Kilusang Bagong Lipunan politicians Category:Nacionalista Party politicians




↩



