

Terang Boelan (released internationally as Full Moon) is a 1937 film written by Saeroen and directed by Albert Balink. Starring Rd. Mochtar, Roekiah, and E. T. Effendi, it followed two lovers who elope after one is nearly forced to marry an opium smuggler. Shot in the Dutch East Indies and Singapore and targeted at native audiences, the film featured kroncong music and several actors from Balink's previous work Pareh (1936).
Terang Boelan was a commercial success, earning 200,000 Straits dollars in British Malaya. This revived the faltering film industry in the colony and inspired native-oriented movies in Malaya. Modern critical reception of the lost film has generally been positive, although complaints have been targeted at the formulaic nature of later films which followed Terang Boelan{{'s}} formula. 
Plot
Rohaya (Roekiah) must separate from her lover, Kasim (Rd. Mochtar), so that she can marry her father's choice, the disreputable but rich Musa (E. T. Effendi). The night before the wedding, Kasim plays the song &quot;Terang Boelan&quot; for Rohaya, and they agree to elope. The following day, Rohaya and Mochtar escape from Sawoba Island to Malacca, where Kasim begins work at a drydock and Rohaya keeps busy as a housewife. They discover that Kasim's old friend, Dullah (Kartolo), has lived in Malacca for some time.
However, their life together is interrupted when Musa, who is actually an opium dealer, discovers them. While Kasim is away at work, Rohaya's father (Muhin) comes and takes her back to Sawoba. Kasim, having discovered Musa's deeds, returns to his hometown and rallies the villagers by telling them of Musa's opium dealings. He then begins fighting with Musa. As it looks as if he will lose the fight, he is saved by Dullah, who had followed him back to Sawoba. The villagers and Rohaya's father agree that Kasim and Rohaya should be together, as they are truly in love.
Production
During 1934 and early 1935, all feature films released in the Dutch East Indies had been produced by The Teng Chun, based on Chinese mythology or martial arts; this situation was an effect of the Great Depression and changing market trends. The Dutchman Albert Balink, despite having no formal film experience, had produced Pareh (Rice) in 1935, joining with the ethnic Chinese Wong brothers (Othniel and Joshua) and Dutch documentarian Mannus Franken in an attempt to show that locally-produced, well-made films could be profitable. Pareh was a failure and bankrupted the producers, leaving The to dominate the industry for a further two years.
By late 1936 Balink had found financial backing and opened the Batavia- (now Jakarta-) based Dutch Indies Film Syndicate (, or ANIF), which focused mainly on newsreels and documentaries, with the Wongs and Franken. On 1 January 1937 ANIF announced that it would produce several feature films, one of which was Terang Boelan. As opposed to The, who targeted his films at lower-class audiences, Balink targeted his film at educated Native Indonesians. According to the Indonesian film critic Salim Said, this arose from Balink's experience with Pareh and resulted in a less ethnological approach.
The story for Terang Boelan was written by Saeroen, a reporter with the newspaper Pemandangan who had close connections to the theatrical community. The film was written shortly after the domestic release of the American-produced Dorothy Lamour vehicle The Jungle Princess (1936), which served as an inspiration. The Indonesian film historian Misbach Yusa Biran wrote that this gave Terang Boelan stylistic and thematic similarities to the earlier film. Said also recognised such similarities, describing Terang Boelan as reflecting the &quot;jungle princess&quot; works popular at the time. Saeroen named the fictional island on which Terang Boelan takes place, Sawoba, after the crew: Saeroen, Wong, and Balink.
 Filming began by February 1937, under Balink's direction and with the Wongs on camera. Sources conflict on whether Franken was involved; Biran wrote that Franken had been left in charge of the studio's documentaries, while the American film scholar Karl G. Heider recorded Franken as co-directing the film. Scenes were shot in black-and-white at Cilincing in Batavia, Merak Beach in Banten, and Tanjong Katong in Singapore, and used highly flammable nitrate film.
The cast of Terang Boelan mostly consisted of actors who had appeared in Pareh. This included the leading actor, Rd. Mochtar, and several minor players, including E. T. Effendi and Soekarsih. Other cast members, including the leading lady Roekiah and her husband Kartolo, were drawn from traditional toneel theatrical troupes. The film, which included the songs &quot;Terang Boelan&quot; and &quot;Boenga Mawar&quot; (&quot;Rose&quot;), required its cast to sing keroncong music (traditional music with Portuguese influences); as Mochtar was unable to perform, Ismail Marzuki &lt;U+2013&gt; later known as a composer &lt;U+2013&gt; sang while Mochtar lip synced. Marzuki also provided the film's music.
Release and reception
Terang Boelan was released in 1937; it was also marketed under the Dutch title Het Eilan der Droomen. it made its premier at the Rex Theatre in Batavia. The film was advertised as proving that the Indies were as beautiful as Hawaii, a popular island paradise in contemporary films. Posters also emphasised the use of Indonesian; William van der Heide, a lecturer on film studies at the University of Newcastle in Australia, notes that the film continued a trend of &quot;Indonesianisation&quot;, or a national identity, which had been present for several years.
The film was a commercial success, both in the Indies and internationally; native audiences included native fans of toneel and kroncong who rarely went to the cinema, and much of the audience consisted of people from the lower classes. After being licensed by RKO Radio Pictures, the film was screened in British Malaya, where it was advertised as &quot;the first and best Malay musical&quot; and earned 200,000 Straits dollars (then equivalent to US$ 114,470 ) in two months. Terang Boelan proved to be the most successful production in the area until 1953's Krisis (Crisis), released after Indonesia had become independent.
However, ANIF was displeased with the film and halted its other non-documentary productions. One of the studio's cameramen, an Indo named Steffens, suggests that ANIF's management preferred works of non-fiction. As a result of the company's reaction, Balink left the Indies and immigrated to the United States. Other cast and crew members also left the company and joined Tan's Film, including the Wongs, following a short tour in Malaya. Mochtar and Roekiah became a popular screen couple beginning with the company's production Fatima, which kept much of the cast of Terang Boelan; they stayed booked together until Mochtar left the company in 1940. Mochtar also married fellow Terang Boelan actress Soekarsih.
Legacy
 The success of Terang Boelan led to an &quot;explosion&quot; in film production in the colony, many of these films following the same formula, including songs, beautiful scenery, and romance. Before the film was released, local studios had generally been unsuccessful in finding a premise popular with audiences, but the triple successes of Terang Boelan, Fatima, and Alang-Alang (Grass; 1939) revived the industry. Four new production houses were established in 1940, and actors and actresses previously attached to theatrical troupes entered the film industry, which was reaching new audiences. Most locally-produced films films released in the Indies were made between 1939 and the Japanese occupation in 1942. Meanwhile, in Malaya, the brothers Run Run and Runme Shaw, drawing inspiration from Terang Boelan and Alang-Alang{{'s}} success with Malay audiences, established Malay Film Productions in Singapore. The studio was one of the more successful in the colony.
Heider considered Terang Boelan one of the two most important cinematic works from the Dutch East Indies during the 1930s; Balink's earlier film Pareh was the other. Biran considered the film a turning point in the history of Indonesian cinema, showing the possibilities of the medium; Said concurred, describing the film as a milestone in Indonesia's history. However, the repeated use of its formula has been criticised. The director Teguh Karya, for instance, was heavily critical of films which used the same formula as Terang Boelan without building on it.
Terang Boelan is considered lost, as are most domestic productions from the era. The Filipino film historian and director Nick Deocampo noted that productions made with nitrate film burned easily and were thus easily lost, but suggested that copies of Terang Boelan may have survived until the 1970s. In a 1991 publication Said, Heider, and the American translator John H. McGlynn expressed hope that copies of the film have survived in &quot;attics&quot; in Indonesia or the Netherlands.
Notes

References
Footnotes

Bibliography


















External links





id:Terang Boelan
Category:Films of the Dutch East Indies
