


Summary
The Elmezzi Graduate School of Molecular Medicine is a unique program that confers the PhD degree in Molecular Medicine to highly trained young physicians who wish to pursue careers in biomedical research. 1 2 This graduate school provides the grounding for the Department of Molecular Medicine3 for Hofstra North Shore-LIJ School of Medicine at Hofstra University.. It is a registered non-profit organization. 4 5
Mission
To provide superior academic training of physicians to discover and understand the causes of human diseases and to rapidly and effectively translate this information into diagnostic and therapeutic solutions.
Vision
To train the next generation of leaders in the field of translational research.
History
The Elmezzi Graduate School is part of the North Shore-LIJ Health System and a sister organization to the Feinstein Institute for Medical Research in Manhasset, NY. It became part of the Health System and Feinstein Institute in 2011 and was renamed from Picower Graduate School Of Molecular Medicine to the Elmezzi Graduate School of Molecular Medicine in 2008 due to a $15 million dollar donation67 to endow the graduate school from the Thomas and Jeanne Elmezzi Private Foundation8 . Biomedical research in the North Shore-LIJ Health System has been vital within its two major academic medical center - North Shore University Hopsital and Long Island Jewish Medical Center since their establishment in the early 1950's. With continued growth, research through the system would become part of the Feinstein Institute for Medical Research. The Feinstein opened in 1999 to facilitate disease-oriented basic and clinical research.
Currently, more than 125 investigators and clinical scientists are enrolled in the Institute, conducting research in autoimmunity, rheumatology, oncology, immunology and inflammation, genetics, psychiatry, neurology, surgery, obstetrics/gynecology and many other specialties. Through its connection to the hospital system, the Elmezzi Graduate School and The Feinstein Institute bridge the gap between biomedical research and patient care, accessing hundreds of thousands of patients in the health system's 15 hospitals, four long-term care facilities, three trauma centers, six home health agencies and dozens of outpatient facilities. The scientists of the Institute and the students of the graduate school collaborate with clinicians (physicians, dentists, medical students, fellows and residents) throughout the system to identify critical unanswered questions relating to diseases treated in the hospitals. These questions are developed into research to shed light on basic biological processes underlying disease.
Noted faculty
:* Yousef Al-Abed, PhD
:* Franak Batliwalla, PhD
:* Vincent Bonagura, MD
:* Nicholas Chiorazzi, MD
:* Barbara Cornblatt, PhD
:* Peter Davies (scientist), PhD
:* Betty Diamond, MD
:* David Eidelberg, MD
:* Peter Gregersen, MD
:* Daniel Grande PhD
:* Percio Gulko, MD
:* John Kane, MD
:* Annette Lee, PhD
:* Martin Lesser, PhD
:* Jeffrey Lipton, MD, PhD
:* Johnson Liu, MD
:* Anil Malhotra, MD
:* Christine Metz, PhD
:* Edmund J Miller, PhD
:* Patricia A Mongini, PhD
:* Kaie Ojamaa, PhD
:* Saul Powell, PhD
:* Delbert Robinson, MD
:* Jesse Roth, MD
:* Thomas Rothstein, MD, PhD
:* Maria Ruggieri, PhD
:* Barbara Sherry, PhD
:* Y. Eric Shi, MD, PhD
:* Pravin C Singhal, MD
:* Bettie Steinberg, PhD
:* Marc Symons, PhD
:* Kevin J. Tracey, MD
:* Haichao Wang, PhD
:* Ping Wang, MD
See also


Medical education in the United States
North Shore-LIJ Health System
Feinstein Institute for Medical Research
Long Island Jewish Medical Center
North Shore University Hospital

References

External links

Elmezzi Graduate School of Molecular Medicine&lt;U+2014&gt;official website.
Information on the Feinstein's Web site&lt;U+2014&gt;Feinstein Website.
The Feinstein Institute for Medical Research
North Shore LIJ Health System
Molecular Medicine web site
North Shore LIJ Health System web site
Feinstein Institute web site
The Robert S. Boas Center for Genomics and Human Genetics web site


:Category:Universities and colleges in New York :Category:Schools of medicine in New York :Category:Universities and colleges in New York :Category:Educational institutions established in 1996 :Category:Healthcare in New York City
Dwrosenthal (talk) 22:21, 5 December 2011 (UTC)



↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩


