
Nycticebus kayan is a strepsirrhine primate and a species of slow loris that is native to the northern and central highland region of the island of Borneo in Indonesia. This population was originally thought to be a Bornean slow loris (N. menagensis) until 2013, when a study of museum specimens and photographs identified distinct facial markings, which helped to differentiate it as a separate species. It is distinguished by the high contrast of its black and white facial features, as well as the shape and width of the stripes of its facial markings.
The species is named after the Kayan River, which runs through the its native habitat. As with other slow lorises, this arboreal and nocturnal species primarily eats insects, tree gum, nectar, and fruit and has a toxic bite, a unique feature among primates. Although not yet evaluated by the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN), it is likely to be listed as &quot;Vulnerable&quot; or placed in a higher-risk category when its conservation status is assessed. It is primarily threatened by habitat loss and the illegal wildlife trade.
Taxonomy and phylogeny
N. kayan is a strepsirrhine primate, and species of slow loris of the genus Nycticebus within the family Lorisidae. Museum specimens of this animal had previously been identified as the Bornean slow loris (Nycticebus menagensis), first described by the English naturalist Richard Lydekker in 1893 as Lemur menagensis. In 1952, all of the slow lorises were lumped together into a single species, the Sunda slow loris (Nycticebus coucang). In 1971, that view was refined by distinguishing the pygmy slow loris (N. pygmaeus) as a species, and by further identifying four subspecies, including N. coucang menagensis, the Bornean slow loris. The Bornean slow loris was elevated to the species level (as N. menagensis) in 2006, when molecular analysis showed it to be genetically distinct from N. coucang.
A 2013 review of museum specimens and photographs attributed to N. menagensis resulted in elevating two of its former subspecies to the species N. bancanus and N. borneanus. Additionally, N. kayan emerged as a new species, which had previously been overlooked. All newly recognized or elevated species showed significant differences in their &quot;face mask&quot;&lt;U+2014&gt;the coloration patterns on their face. Data suggests that N. kayan diverged from N. menagensis and N. borneanus through sympatric speciation (living in the same geographic region), while geographic barriers may account for its divergence with N. bancanus (allopatric speciation).
N. kayan is named after the Kayan River, which runs through its native habitat and near Peleben, the type locality of the original specimen. The holotype, AMNH 106012, was originally collected on 8 October 1935 by Baron V. von Plessen near Peleben in the province of East Kalimantan in Borneo and is housed in the American Museum of Natural History in New York. It consists of a male skin and skull, with a head-body length of .
Physical description
Like other slow lorises, it has a vestigial tail, round head, short ears, a toothcomb and a curved grooming claw, both used for grooming. The face mask of N. kayan differs from those of other Bornean lorises in several ways. First, the top of the dark ring around its eyes is either rounded or pointed (not diffuse at the edges) and the bottom stretches below the zygomatic arch, and sometimes extends as far down as the jaw. Second, the stripe between the eyes is occasionally bulb-shaped, compared to the rectangular stripe seen in the neighboring species. Also, a light band of fur in front of the ears is usually intermediate in width compared to the narrow and wide bands seen in the other Bornean species. Compared to N. menagensis, the facemask of N. kayan has more contrast between its dark black and white features, and its ears are always covered in hair, whereas those of N. menagensis are generally naked. Overall, it's fur is generally longer and fluffier compared to N. menagensis. Based on a limited number of specimens, the species is about  long, and weighs about .
Distribution
N. kayan is found in central and northern Borneo. Its range extends south to the Mahakam and Rajang Rivers in the provinces of East Kalimantan and Sarawak respectively, and north to southern side of Mount Kinabalu in the province of Sabah. Although it is not found along the coast, its range spans Borneo from east to west. Its range overlaps that of N. menagensis in East Kalimantan and Sabah, and N. borneanus is a neighboring species.
Habitat and ecology
Like other slow lorises, N. kayan is arboreal, nocturnal, and omnivorous, eating primarily insects, tree gum, nectar, and fruit. Likewise, this species has a toxic bite, a unique feature found only in slow lorises among primates. The toxin is produced by licking a brachial gland (a gland by their elbow), and the secretion mixes with its saliva to activate. Their toxic bite is a deterrent to predators, and the toxin is also applied to the fur during grooming as a form of protection for their infants. When threatened, slow lorises may also lick their brachial glands and bite their aggressors, delivering the toxin into the wounds. Slow lorises can be reluctant to release their bite, which is likely to maximize the transfer of toxins.
The face mask may help the species identify potential mates by distinguishing species, and may serve as an anti-predator strategy by making its eyes appear larger than they really are.
Conservation
While this new species has yet to be assessed by the IUCN, N. menagensis was listed as &quot;Vulnerable&quot; in 2012. Because that species has been divided into four distinct species, each of the new species faces a higher risk of extinction. Accordingly, each of them are expected to be listed as &quot;Vulnerable&quot; at the least, with some of them likely to be assigned to a higher-risk category.1
Between 1987 and 2012, one-third of Borneo's forests have been lost, making habitat loss one of the greatest threats to the survival of N. kayan. The illegal wildlife trade is also a major factor, with loris parts commonly sold in traditional medicine and viral videos on YouTube promoting the exotic pet trade.234 However, all slow loris species are protected from commercial trade under Appendix I of CITES.
References

Literature cited














ca:Nycticebus kayan de:Nycticebus kayan es:Nycticebus kayan pnb:&lt;U+06A9&gt;&lt;U+0627&gt;&lt;U+06CC&gt;&lt;U+0627&gt;&lt;U+0646&gt; &lt;U+0644&gt;&lt;U+0648&gt;&lt;U+0631&gt;&lt;U+06CC&gt;&lt;U+0632&gt; pt:Nycticebus kayan vi:Nycticebus kayan
Category:Lorises and galagos Category:Mammals of Borneo Category:Venomous mammals Category:Animals described in 2012 Category:Mammals of Southeast Asia









