

 &quot;White van man&quot; is a usually pejorative stereotype used in the United Kingdom to describe drivers of light commercial vehicles such as the Ford Transit. Such vehicles are commonly painted white in order to facilitate easy sign-writing on the panelled sides. The stereotype represents the drivers of such vehicles as having poor driving skills and / or an aggressive and inconsiderate manner. The stereotypical &quot;white van man&quot; is often self-employed or the owner of a small business such as builder, carpenter, or plumber.
United Kingdom
Although in popular use beforehand the term was used by BBC Radio 2's Sarah Kennedy in 1997, sometimes also credited with coining the phrase. However, it had been previously used by comedienne Jo Brand in the early 1990s. Despite this, in 2005 Sarah Kennedy was made honorary president of the First Ford Transit Owner's Club.1 White Van Man is a trade mark registered with the Trade Marks Registry under the Trade Marks Act 1994 of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
Alastair Stewart, presenter of ITV's Police, Camera, Action!, in the episode A Lorry Load of Trouble (produced in 1997), had a sequence of footage from police forces in the United Kingdom showing the problems that &quot;white van man&quot; was causing. Between 2001 and 2003, The Sun newspaper used a &quot;white van man&quot; as an alleged representative voice of the people. This feature was subsequently ported to the Xfm radio show The Ricky Gervais Show, in which Karl Pilkington would answer the same questions as &quot;White Van Karl&quot;. An episode of Top Gear featured the White Van Man Challenge.
In 2010 BBC Three will be screening a sitcom called &quot;White Van Man&quot; written and created by Adrian Poynton and staring Will Mellor and Georgia Moffett. It was filmed in and around Greater Manchester, including the Best Bet Betting Shop in Cheadle Village. It will start on BBC3 in March 2011.
References

External links

BBC Radio 4 documentary
Academic study of white van overtaking habits around cyclists by Dr Ian Walker
SIRC report: White Van Man
A White Van Man in London blog: The trials and tribulations


Category:Stereotypes Category:Social groups Category:British culture Category:English phrases



carpages.co.uk - Ford Transit Owners Club↩


