
&quot;Never Too Far&quot; is a song written and produced by American singer Mariah Carey, Jimmy Jam and Terry Lewis for Carey's tenth album/soundtrack, Glitter. The protagonist of this ballad states that although physical distance can sometimes separate lovers, the love they share will never be too far apart. It was released as the album's second single in 2001, and was Carey's first radio airplay-only release in the U.S. after 1998 when Billboard magazine had given chart eligibility to singles that weren't released in a physical format.
&quot;Never Too Far&quot; became Carey's first U.S. single to not appear on the Billboard Hot 100, but it reached number 5 on Billboard's Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles chart, which represents the twenty-five singles below the Hot 100's number 100 position which have not yet appeared on the Hot 100. It was not solicited to R&amp;B radio stations in the U.S. As a double A-side with &quot;Don't Stop (Funkin' 4 Jamaica)&quot;, the single reached the top forty in the United Kingdom and Australia. In Germany, Switzerland, the Netherlands, and Sweden, it was released on its own and peaked outside the top forty.
No remixes of the song were commissioned, though a radio edit reduces the lengthy introduction. The charity single &quot;Never Too Far/Hero Medley&quot; combines the first verse of &quot;Never Too Far&quot; with a re-recorded version of the second verse and bridge of Carey's &quot;Hero&quot; (1993), and it was later released in the U.S. and charted on the Billboard Hot 100.
Carey was unable to film a music video for the single as she was recovering from an emotional and physical breakdown. Instead, a video was created using a scene taken directly from the film Glitter, where Billie Frank (played by Carey) sings the song at Madison Square Garden during her first sold-out concert. Frank's performance of the song in the film omits its entire second verse, and the song's development runs in parallel with the film's love story.
Formats and track listings
European CD single

&quot;Never Too Far&quot; (Edit)
&quot;Don't Stop (Funkin' 4 Jamaica)&quot; (featuring Mystikal)

Australian/European CD maxi-single

&quot;Never Too Far&quot; (Edit)
&quot;Don't Stop (Funkin' 4 Jamaica)&quot; (featuring Mystikal)
&quot;Loverboy&quot; (Drums Of Love)
&quot;Never Too Far&quot; (The Video)

Charts



Chart (2001)
Peak
position




Australian Singles Chart1
36


Dutch Singles Chart2
67


German Singles Chart3
97


Spanish Singles Chart4
16


Swedish Singles Chart5
56


Swiss Singles Chart6
65


UK Singles Chart7
32


U.S. Billboard Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles8
5


U.S. Billboard Hot Adult Contemporary Tracks9
17



References


de:Never Too Far es:Never Too Far hu:Never Too Far ru:Never Too Far
Category:2001 singles Category:Mariah Carey songs Category:Songs from films Category:Pop ballads Category:Songs written by Mariah Carey Category:Songs written by Jimmy Jam and Terry Lewis



Australian Singles Chart↩
Dutch Singles Chart↩
German Singles Chart↩
http://www.afyvecharts.blogspot.com/↩
Swedish Singles Chart↩
Swiss Singles Chart↩
UK Singles Chart↩
Bubbling Under Hot 100 Singles↩
Hot Adult Contemporary Tracks↩


