
Map of the National Forest

Mark Twain National Forest (MTNF) is a U.S. National Forest located in the southern half of Missouri. MTNF was established on September 11, 1939. It is named for author Mark Twain, a Missouri native. The MTNF covers approximately 1.5 million acres (6,100 km&lt;U+00B2&gt;), 78,000 acres (320 km&lt;U+00B2&gt;) of which are Wilderness, and National Scenic River area. MTNF spans 29 counties and represents 11% of all forested land in Missouri. MTNF is divided into six distinct ranger districts: Ava-Cassville-Willow Springs, Eleven Point, Houston-Rolla-Cedar Creek, Poplar Bluff, Potosi-Fredericktown, and the Salem. The six ranger districts actually comprise nine overall unique tracts of forests. Its headquarters are in Rolla, Missouri.
Some unique features of the Mark Twain include Greer Spring, which is the largest spring on National Forest land, pumping an average of 214 million gallons of water per day.1 The public can also visit the Glade Top Trail National Scenic Byway, which offers views of over  to the Boston Mountains in Arkansas.
History
In the 1870s, citizens of southern Missouri began an era of extensive logging of the state's native oak, hickory, and pine forests. Lumber mills were commonplace, but by the 1920s they had disappeared, along with much of the state's native forests. Thus, in 1939 President Franklin D. Roosevelt signed the MTNF into existence. In March 1933, he also created the Emergency Conservation Work Act, better known as the Civilian Conservation Corps (CCC). In the area that would later become Mark Twain National Forest, hundreds of young men at over fifty CCC sites worked at building roads and planting hundreds of acres of pine to preserve and enhance the natural resources of southern Missouri. Many of their contributions can still be visited and enjoyed today.
Wilderness areas


Bell Mountain Wilderness
Devils Backbone Wilderness
Hercules-Glades Wilderness
Irish Wilderness
Paddy Creek Wilderness
Piney Creek Wilderness
Rockpile Mountain Wilderness


Counties
Although it is far from being the largest National Forest in acreage, Mark Twain National Forest is located in more counties than any other. As of September 30, 2007, its 1,490,862 acres (2,329.47 sq mi, or 6,033.3 km&lt;U+00B2&gt;) were spread over parts of 29 counties in southern and central Missouri.2



County
Area




Acres
Hectares


Oregon County



Ripley County



Iron County



Carter County



Reynolds County



Wayne County



Shannon County



Washington County



Dent County



Taney County



Phelps County



Barry County



Christian County



Madison County



Howell County



Crawford County



Texas County



Butler County



Douglas County



Pulaski County



Ozark County



Laclede County



Callaway County



Stone County



Sainte Genevieve County



Wright County



Boone County



Bollinger County



Saint Francois County




References

External links





Category:National Forests of Missouri Category:The Ozarks Category:Civilian Conservation Corps in Missouri   Category:Protected areas of Oregon County, Missouri Category:Protected areas of Ripley County, Missouri Category:Protected areas of Iron County, Missouri Category:Protected areas of Carter County, Missouri Category:Protected areas of Reynolds County, Missouri Category:Protected areas of Wayne County, Missouri Category:Protected areas of Shannon County, Missouri Category:Protected areas of Washington County, Missouri Category:Protected areas of Dent County, Missouri Category:Protected areas of Taney County, Missouri Category:Protected areas of Phelps County, Missouri Category:Protected areas of Barry County, Missouri Category:Protected areas of Christian County, Missouri Category:Protected areas of Madison County, Missouri Category:Protected areas of Howell County, Missouri Category:Protected areas of Crawford County, Missouri Category:Protected areas of Texas County, Missouri Category:Protected areas of Butler County, Missouri Category:Protected areas of Douglas County, Missouri Category:Protected areas of Pulaski County, Missouri Category:Protected areas of Ozark County, Missouri Category:Protected areas of Laclede County, Missouri Category:Protected areas of Callaway County, Missouri Category:Protected areas of Stone County, Missouri Category:Protected areas of Ste. Genevieve County, Missouri Category:Protected areas of Wright County, Missouri Category:Protected areas of Boone County, Missouri Category:Protected areas of Bollinger County, Missouri Category:Protected areas of St. Francois County, Missouri



http://www.dnr.mo.gov/env/wrc/springsandcaves.htm↩
Table 6 - NFS Acreage by State, Congressional District and County - United States Forest Service - September 30, 2007↩


