
Victoria Peak within the Maya Mountains is the second highest mountain in Belize. The highest peak in the country, Doyle's Delight at a height of , is located  southwest of Victoria Peak.1 Victoria Peak is situated in the Cockscomb Basin Wildlife Sanctuary. Victoria Peak is situated in the Stann Creek District of Belize, in the Cockscomb Basin Wildlife Sanctuary, and is home to many flora and fauna common to Belize. 2 It was pronounced a natural monument in 1998, comprising about 4,847 acres bordered by the Sittee River Forest Reserve, Cockscomb Basin Wildlife Sanctuary, and Chiquibul National Park.3
Ecology and Climate
Victoria Peak is situated in a broad-leaved montane elfin forest. The tropical evergreen jungle has been damaged by hurricanes such as Hurricane Hattie in 1961, and fires caused by occasional lightning. These environmental factors have caused the ecosystem to become stunted. Along with averages of 100 inches of rainfall per year, Victoria peak is often windswept and cloud covered and the soil is poor as the various surrounding vegetation takes up all of the nutrients. 4The mountain is found covered with non-calcareous rock, along with the growth of many different plant species.5
Flora
Many of the plants that thrive in this diverse forest are used for medicinal practices, food, or even as guides and trail markers ensuring the Maya hunters do not become lost in the forest. 6 The vegetation begins at the base of the mountain with moist, tropical forest, transforming into elfin shrubland, characterized by sphagnum moss and a tree canopy of about 2-3 metres high. Just ahead of the summit is rich, humid forest that is dense with secondary growth among mature tree stands, yet with a relatively clear forest floor. 7 8 At the base of the mountain compiled of sedge marsh that eventually turns to orange groves.9 The many species of trees inhabiting the peak include mahogany, cedar, banak waika swivelstick, quamwood, yemeri, negrito, santa maria, and rosewood and many more.
Epidendrum ibaguense, or the fiery-coloured orchid, is a rare species of orchid that only grows at these higher elevations.10 One of the more common plant species seen is the Hot Lips Bush, it is most frequently spotted along the trail edges and is characterized by its &lt;U+2018&gt;pouting&lt;U+2019&gt; red flower.11
Frequent species of plants that are characteristic to Victoria Peak and the Cockscomb range are Clusia sp. and Myrica cerifera, two plants species which form thick stands that average 1-2m tall. Shrubs such as these are very often accompanied by &lt;U+201C&gt;beard lichen&lt;U+201D&gt; growing amongst the branches. Bromeliads and orchids are also numerous, such as the orange flowering orchid, Epidendrum ibaguense 12 or the scarlet orchid, also known as dragon's tongue.13
Fauna

Avians


As many as 300 species of birds can be spotted in the Cockscomb Basin itself. There are many native species that reside in the Belizean forests on the Victoria Peak year round, as well as seasonal migrants that average about 18% of the bird population. Of those, there are critically endangered species present such as the ornate hawk-eagle, keel-billed motmot, and the scarlet macaw.14
Other common birds of Victoria Peak and the Cockscomb Basin include: great curassow, crested guan, clay-coloured robins, social flycatchers, collared-seed eaters, crimson collared and masked tanagers, bat falcons, Montezuma&lt;U+2019&gt;s oropendola, as well as white-collared manakins, paraque , the slaty-breasted tinimou, chestnutheaded oropendolas, parrots, toucans, and Agami heron to name a few.15

Mammals


Cockscomb Wildlife Sanctuary in the Victoria Peak region hosts the world&lt;U+2019&gt;s largest jaguar concentration, estimating 200 jaguars. Panthera onca (jaguar) is the third largest member of the cat family in the world and is considered endangered in the majority of its habitat ranges. Other common mammals of Victoria Peak region that are thriving in the protected area and Cockscomb Sanctuary are: jaguarondi, ocelot, puma, margay, peccary, paca, as well as brocket deer, nine-banded armadillo, tayra, otter, coatimundi, gibnut, and agouti. 16
Some of the animals listed on the IUCN Red List of seriously endangered mammals that inhabit Victoria Peak and area are the ocelot, margay, jaguarondi, puma as well as Baird&lt;U+2019&gt;s Tapir, all of which have populations beginning to increase in size.1718

Other


There are many reptiles, amphibians and insects that frequent the broad-leaved montane elfin forest. Recently, Smilisca cyonostica (formerly S phaeota), a species of frog, along with Gastrophryne elegans, a toad, that are have not been seen around the Belize area prior, was also recorded on the peak. As well as spotting the amphibians, a week-long survey of the diversity of species produced 44 species of butterfly to be recorded.19
The carpet of the forest can be covered in leaf-cutter ants that create large routes along which they travel, while tarantulas may remain hidden under the leaves of the trail edges. Botflies are also present, and infect mosquitoes with their eggs to then be transferred to a bovine host and to hatch into larvae right underneath the epidermal layer.[5]
References

External links

Mountain climbing of Victoria Peak


Category:Mountains of Belize




↩
National Parks System Act (2003). Natural Monument Reservation (Victoria Peak Natural Monument) Order. Retrieved March 1, 2014, from http://www.biodiversity.bz/downloads/laws/parks_act.pdf↩

↩
↩

Casadro Internet Group, Belize. (n.d.). Cockscomb Basin Wildlife Sanctuary &amp; Jaguar Preserve. Retrieved February 28, 2014, from http://ambergriscaye.com/pages/town/parkcockscomb.html↩









IUCN Red List (2013). Retrieved March 28, 2014, from http://www.iucnredlist.org/↩



