


, frequently abbreviated as SSBB, is a fighting game for Nintendo's forthcoming console Wii. Its official trailer was first unveiled at E3 2006. As the third iteration in the massively successful series, it has been confirmed that it will support some network features and Internet play (Wi-Fi).12 Brawl is the first Super Smash Bros. game that features a character from a franchise not owned by Nintendo with the inclusion of Solid Snake from Konami's Metal Gear series. Although originally suggested to be a launch title, Super Smash Bros. Brawl is slated for release sometime in 2007. Super Smash Bros. Brawl is currently the most anticipated game on any system according to IGN's Top 100 Games list. 3
Confirmed characters

Left to right: Link, Mario, Zero Suit Samus, Pikachu, Pit, Kirby, and Meta Knight.

Kirby


is the main character of the Kirby series, first appearing in Kirby's Dream Land for the Game Boy. Kirby has appeared in both Super Smash Bros. and Super Smash Bros. Melee, having the ability to suck opponents into his mouth, taking on aspects of that character's appearance, and copying one of that character's signature attacks. This ability gives Kirby a wide range of possible moves. Kirby's &quot;Super Smash&quot; move is his &quot;Cook&quot; power from Kirby Super Star, which involves boiling enemies in a pot.
Link


, the hero of the Legend of Zelda series, is a Hylian swordsman who has appeared as a fighter in both previous Super Smash Bros. games. Link's swordplay, signature downward strike, and bow are briefly featured in the E3 trailer. Also demonstrated in the trailer is his Super Smash attack, in which he slashes at his opponent while they are trapped between two Triforces (see below). Although the Ocarina of Time incarnation of Link appears in Super Smash Bros. and again in Melee, the Twilight Princess incarnation appears in Brawl, still wielding the Master Sword.
Mario


, an Italian plumber, is the main character of the myriads of games in the Super Mario series, and is present in both of the Super Smash Bros. games. Mario's fireball attack, present in both previous games, is seen in the E3 trailer, as well as his new Super Smash move, where he projects a massive blast of fire that moves across the entire stage.
Meta Knight


is a recurring character from the Kirby series, and is the second of the series to become a Super Smash Bros. fighter. In the trailer shown at E3 2006, he can be seen performing quick sword strikes and blocking an attack with his cloak, which blends into the background. He is also shown jumping multiple times in midair, an ability previously held only by Kirby and Jigglypuff in past Super Smash Bros. games. During the trailer, Meta Knight's wings only appear while he is in midair. The official website confirms that his symbol is the same as Kirby's: the Warp Star.4
Pikachu


is the unofficial mascot of the Pok&lt;U+00E9&gt;mon series, and has appeared in both previous Super Smash Bros. games. While its trademark attacks are seen in the trailer, including Thunder, Thunder Jolt, and Quick Attack, its Super Smash attack has yet to be seen.
Pikachu became iconic and most famous in the Pok&lt;U+00E9&gt;mon anime. Its first video game appearances were in Pok&lt;U+00E9&gt;mon Red and Blue for the original Game Boy and then as the lead Pok&lt;U+00E9&gt;mon in Pok&lt;U+00E9&gt;mon Yellow for the Game Boy Color. Since then, it has been included in every Pok&lt;U+00E9&gt;mon video game made to date.
Pit


, the hero of Kid Icarus, makes his first playable appearance since the 1991 Game Boy game Kid Icarus: Of Myths and Monsters. He is shown in the trailer fighting again with the Sacred Bow of Palutena, which now has the previously unseen ability to separate into two short blades for close-range combat. In addition, he wears a pair of glowing rings which slide onto the Sacred Bow when he prepares to fire light arrows from it. The rings retract back onto his arm after use. In the trailer video, he is seen jumping multiple times in midair as Meta Knight does. Pit's symbol is a bow and arrow tilted at an angle as shown under his bio on the official website.5
Samus Aran


, the heroine of the Metroid series, has appeared in both previous Super Smash Bros. games. She returns in Brawl not just in her Power Suit, but also as Zero Suit Samus, which is based on her unsuited form from Metroid: Zero Mission. The official website states that Zero Suit Samus &quot;is not a pure character addition,&quot; but rather a special mode for Samus which manifests under &quot;certain conditions,&quot; the specifics of which are currently unknown. The trailer confirms that Samus's Arm Cannon returns as her primary attack while Zero Suit Samus is shown wielding a gun that can transform into an energy whip. 6
Solid Snake
  , the main character from Konami's Metal Gear franchise, is the first third-party character to become a Super Smash Bros. fighter. He appears in Brawl as he does in MGS2, though with facial hair reminiscent of Naked Snake from MGS3. Snake's moves are not showcased in the trailer, but Brawl's director, Masahiro Sakurai, states on the official website that since he did not want to incorporate real-world weapons into the game, Snake instead will use a variety of explosives, including rocket launchers (as they might be &quot;humorous&quot; if used in-game), and fight hand-to-hand. Snake will also have use of his trademark cardboard box, which he is seen hiding in near the end of the trailer.
Snake's symbol is that of the FOX organization from MGS3.7
Wario


, Mario's rival and star of the WarioWare, Inc. and Wario Land games, makes his first playable appearance in the series. His appearance is based on his WarioWare costume. In the E3 trailer, one of his attacks is atomic flatulence, called the &quot;Wario Waft&quot; according to his profile on the official website. Wario's gas builds up over time. His symbol is the letter &quot;W&quot;.8
Stages

 Although unconfirmed, the trailer suggests that new stages will include the interior and exterior of a gloomy castle,9 which has been speculated to be based on Fire Emblem: Path of Radiance (as it shows flags in the background of the same red color as the Daein flag, with symbols resembling, but not identical to, the Daein crest), the Halberd, Meta Knight's airship from Kirby Super Star, and an island floating high above a rocky canyon. It should be noted however, that in the first trailers for Super Smash Bros. Melee, originally shown at E&lt;U+00B3&gt; 2001, a number of levels that turned out to either not be in the final game at all, or were heavily modified, could be seen.10
A location depicted in a screenshot of Snake sneaking up on Link heavily resembles an area from the Shadow Moses Island facility in Metal Gear Solid. It was revealed by Nintendo Power that Hideo Kojima is developing this level himself.


Items and abilities

 The video from E3 suggests the new ability to perform special moves, referred to as &quot;Super Smash&quot; moves by fans. These abilities are acquired through power-ups, unofficially called &quot;Smash Orbs&quot;, which bear the Super Smash symbol.. The trailer shows Mario's, Link's, and Kirby's Super Smash attacks. Mario, who is the only one seen in the trailer actually grabbing a Smash Orb, invokes a large blast of fire, Link performs a barrage of sword slashes while Mario is trapped between two Triforce symbols, and Kirby uses his &quot;Cook&quot; ability from Kirby Super Star and Kirby and the Amazing Mirror to boil Mario in a pot.
The E3 trailer also shows footage of a puppy from Nintendogs attempting to climb around on the screen, blocking the view of the battle. Although Nintendo has confirmed that this is caused by an item, the actual item was not shown in the trailer.1
Of the returning characters shown in the preview, their &quot;A&quot;, &quot;B&quot;, and &quot;Smash&quot; attacks are for the most part intact, being modified only graphically.
Music
The main theme for Brawl was revealed in the E3 trailer as the background song, and it was created by the famed Final Fantasy composer, Nobuo Uematsu. It is unknown whether he will be composing additional tracks. Additionally, opera singers Ken Nishikiori and Oriko Takahashi have also contributed to the vocal arrangement in this project. Sakurai stated that the game's music will be performed by a full orchestra with vocals in Latin.11
Development
Masahiro Sakurai, former HAL Laboratories employee and creator of Kirby and the Super Smash Bros. series, is the director for the game.12 An IGN article states that &quot;as of May 2005, the game's development staff consisted of exactly one person,&quot; Sakurai himself, and that there is an office in Tokyo just for the development of Super Smash Bros. Brawl. The article also states that an unknown company whose employees spent a lot of time playing Super Smash Bros. Melee is being brought as the development team, and the team will have access to all the original material and tools from the development of Melee.13 The company is referred to as &quot;The Studio&quot; by Sakurai.
The game was conspicuously absent from Nintendo's Wii showing at their 2006 Pre-E3 press conference. The next day, on Wednesday, May 10, 2006, at the After-Hours Press Conference, Nintendo officially revealed the game under the name of Super Smash Bros. Brawl. Miyamoto and Sakurai, who were there to make the announcement, hinted that the game could have full compatibility with the GameCube controller. Sakurai said that the reason was because he did not want to &quot;alienate those familiar with the pad.&quot; In an interview with IGN, Sakurai said the Wii's motion sensing features might not be included because, &quot;we found that trying to implement too much motion-sensory functionality can get in the way of the game.&quot;14
The inclusion of Konami-created character Solid Snake may seem to conflict with the Super Smash Bros. paradigm — to only include characters from games made by Nintendo and their second parties (e.g. HAL Laboratory) — but Sakurai said that Metal Gear creator Hideo Kojima &quot;practically begged&quot; for Snake to be included in the next Super Smash Bros. game (which, at the time of said &quot;begging&quot;, was during the production of Super Smash Bros. Melee, but production of the game was already too far in to make the addition viable). Incidentally, this isn't the first time Snake appears in a crossover fighting game. He was previously featured as a secret character in DreamMix TV World Fighters.
When questioned about the inclusion of other characters, Shigeru Miyamoto alleged that discussions for possible other third-party characters are underway, but nothing has been confirmed. If a third party character does appear in Brawl, the character must have been on a Nintendo console. Japanese fans were asked to submit their desired characters and musical themes via a forum on the game's official Japanese site, with some possibly appearing in the game. It is currently unknown if Nintendo will ask fans outside of Japan to request characters or musical themes, though it has been said that Sakurai will receive various input from the NSiders forums on the official Nintendo of America website.15
On June 9, 2006, suggestions were no longer taken. In Toukoken, the portion on the Japanese site chronicling character and music suggestion updates, Sakurai has stated that some of the characters in Super Smash Bros. Melee may not return. He also states that he may not want to include many characters who are popular solely in Japan, but is not opposed to them entirely, noting the success that the Fire Emblem characters enjoyed internationally thanks to their inclusion in Melee. He also said that the tentative number of third party characters besides Snake are 1-2 and must have made a appearance on a Nintendo console before.16 In August 2006, Sakurai stated that Sega's Sonic the Hedgehog was the most requested third-party character to be included, but this does not mean Sonic's inclusion has been confirmed.17
In June, Sakurai updated the official website stating that he has to &quot;temporarily stop updating this website as of June, 2006.&quot; Sakurai plans on focusing on the actual development of the game, and doesn't plan on updating the website until Brawl is close to release, or &quot;if anything newsworthy comes up&quot;.18
References



External links

The Official Super Smash Bros. Website
Super Smash Bros. Brawl at IGN
Super Smash Bros. Brawl at Gamespot


es:Super Smash Bros. Brawl fr:Super Smash Bros. Brawl nl:Super Smash Bros. Brawl ja:&lt;U+5927&gt;&lt;U+4E71&gt;&lt;U+95D8&gt;&lt;U+30B9&gt;&lt;U+30DE&gt;&lt;U+30C3&gt;&lt;U+30B7&gt;&lt;U+30E5&gt;&lt;U+30D6&gt;&lt;U+30E9&gt;&lt;U+30B6&gt;&lt;U+30FC&gt;&lt;U+30BA&gt;X pt:Super Smash Bros. Brawl fi:Super Smash Bros. Brawl
Category:Super Smash Bros. games Category:HAL Laboratory games Category:Versus fighting games Category:Nintendo games Category:Wii-only games Category:Nintendo Wi-Fi games Category:2007 computer and video games Category:Fighting games



↩
↩
↩
Meta Knight bio Smashbros.com. URL Accessed May 27, 2006.↩
Pit bio Smashbros.com. URL Accessed May 27, 2006.↩
Zero Suit Samus bio Smashbros.com. URL Accessed May 27, 2006.↩
Snake bio &quot;Smashbros.com&quot;. URL Accessed May 30, 2006↩
Wario bio Smashbros.com. URL Accessed May 27, 2006.↩
Super Smash Bros. Brawl screenshot gallery Smashbros.com. URL Accessed July 10, 2006.↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
Sakurai reveals new Smash Bros Brawl details↩
Smash Bros Brawl Creators Hint at Sonic↩
↩


