 Theodor Gotthilf Leutwein (May 9, 1849 - April 13, 1921) was colonial administrator of German Southwest Africa from 1894-1904. Born in Str&lt;U+00FC&gt;mpfelbrunn in the Grand Duchy of Baden, he replaced Curt von Fran&lt;U+00E7&gt;ois as commander of the Schutztruppe (Imperial Security Troop) in 1894. His personal goal in German Southwest Africa was to create &quot;colonialism without bloodshed&quot;.
During his tenure there, Leutwein created a decentralized administration with three regional centers in Windhoek, Otjimbingwe and Keetmanshoop. The construction of the first railroad between Windhoek and the seaport of Swakopmund was built during his rule.
His policies with the native Africans, which he called the &quot;Leutwein System&quot; was a mixture of diplomacy and military coercion. His relationship with the indigenous Namaqua and Herero tribes were tenuous at best. Conversely, he was often criticized by German colonists as being too lenient with the Africans. In 1904 an uprising by the Herero was the beginning of the end of his colonial leadership. Soon afterwards, William II, German Emperor, replaced Leutwein with the notorious General Lothar von Trotha. Like his successor, Leutwein's conduct in the war was characterized by gross neglect for international law. Thus, he had to admit in May 1904 that the Germans had not taken one Herero prisoner, following an inquiry by the social democratic Reichstag deputy August Bebel.1
In 1906, Leutwein published an autobiography, Elf Jahre als Gouverneur in Deutsch-S&lt;U+00FC&gt;dwestafrika (&quot;Eleven Years as Governor in German South-West Africa&quot;), an historical account of his career in German Southwest Africa. He died in Freiburg.
References

External links

Notable Namibians



  
de:Theodor Leutwein fr:Theodor Leutwein nl:Theodor Leutwein no:Theodor Leutwein
Category:1849 births Category:1921 deaths Category:Colonial people in German Southwest Africa Category:German politicians Category:History of Namibia Category:German Empire Category:People from the Grand Duchy of Baden



cf. Drechsler, Horst: Let Us Die Fighting (London: Zed Press, 1980), 151f.↩


