
Pius X High School (Pius X) was a co-educational, private, four year (grade levels 9-12) high school located at 7851 Gardendale Street, in the city of Downey, California. The school was founded in 1954, and named for Pope Pius X.
From 1968 to 1975, Pius X entered into a revolutionary concept of modern teaching, the &quot;Model School Project.&quot; Pius employed an educational model called &quot;non-gradedness,&quot; which places a student in a class where his or her present achievement is the deciding factor. His success or difficulty throughout the year will enable his or her teachers to place him or her in a phase according to the student's learning capacity. Emphasis is put on progress and learning by the individual, and not a group of thirty or forty students. The student is recognized as being unique and is able to decide for himself or herself which subjects he or she wants to learn, where, from whom, and why. The student was able to enlarge his or her spectrum of learning with greater ease and efficiency, benefiting more from education.
In March 1995 the Archdiocese of Los Angeles announced a school realignment transforming Pius X, a co-ed school, into a co-institutional high school with all-girl St. Matthias High School. St. Matthias, founded in 1960, was located on Stafford Avenue and Belgrade Street in Huntington Park. The Pius X program was phased out over a three year period.
Notable alumni

Rick Adelman, Houston Rockets Head Coach
Dave Alvin, recording artist, Grammy-winning singer/songwriter
Darrin Nelson, former pro football player (Minnesota Vikings)
Lorenzo Romar, head men's basketball coach, University of Washington

See also

List of high schools in Los Angeles County, California
List of high schools in California

External links

St. Matthias High School Web Site

Category:Educational institutions established in 1954 Category:Educational institutions disestablished in 1998 Category:High schools in Los Angeles County Category:Defunct Roman Catholic secondary schools in the United States
