  class=infobox style=font-size:90%; text-align:left; width:23.5em
 -
 colspan=3 bgcolor=#1874CD style=text-align: center; font-size: larger;    Capacha Culture  Archaeological Site
 - style=vertical-align: top; text-align: center;
 colspan=3 bgcolor=#FFFFFF align=center 
 -
  colspan=2 bgcolor=#1874CD  
 -
 colspan=2 
 -
  style=background:#efefef;align=center colspan=2   File:Capacha.png thumb 300px Capacha culture extension Map.
 -
  colspan=2 bgcolor=#1874CD  
 -
  Name:    Complejo Capacha 
 -
  Type    Mesoamerican archaeology 
 -
  Location    Colima, Colima Colima, Colima MEX
 -
  Region    Mesoamerica 
 -
 Coordinates    coord 19 16 54 N 103 41 28 W type:city display=inline,title
 -
  Culture    Capacha
 -
  Language    Nahuatl
 -
  Chronology     2000 to 1000 BCE
 -
  Period    Mesoamerican Preclassical, Classical, Postclassical 
 -
  Apogee    
 -
  INAH Web Page    Non existent
 
Capacha is an archaeological site located about 6 kilometers northeast of the Colima, Colima Colima Municipality, in the Colima Colima State. This site is the heart of the Capacha culture. 

The Capacha Culture is located between the Jalisco Sierra and the Colima Valley. Several sites in the region have relations with Capacha, Embocadero II 800 BCE, in the Mascota Valley, has a background with the shaft tomb tradition. There is also evidence of green stone articles, Jadeite cylindrical beads and possibly Amazonite, as well as Turquoise fragments.Mountjoy 2004. cite web  first=   Lorenza  last=  Lpez Mestas Camberos  title= Green Stones in Central Jalisco url= http://www.famsi.org/reports/03083/index.html publisher=   FAMSI  location=  language=  trans_title=   year= 2004  accessdate=Sept. 2010 

It is known there were close relations between Capacha and El Opeo, by the existing ceramic relationship between types red zonal and dark red/beige, as well as similarities between figurine types of both complexes.Oliveros 1974; Schndube 1980: 151 

This information is corroborated by Opeo style figurines and Capacha type ceramic found in the area of Tuxpan - Tamazula - Zapotln;Lameiras 1990: 27; Schndube 1974: 84 y ss. as well as in other Jalisco state places, where shaft tombs similar to El Opeo and ceramic vessels similar to Capacha were found.Weigand y Beekman 2000: 41 

In addition, the culture and Capacha had some kind of contact with cultures of the Center of Mexico, e.g. Tlatilco, between 1300 and 900 BCE, which probably had a higher level of development at that time. Beatriz Braniff and other researchers pointed the presence of a tertium quid in central Mexico differentiated from Olmec traditions and the center of Mexico, whose origin was the western region.Braniff 1998: 28.  

Background
During prehispanic times, the region of the Colima state was seat of various ethnic groups which flourished in western Mexico. The region was inhabited by various Lordships not reigns as erroneously stated by some historians that disputed the territories. At the beginning of the 16th century, purpecha or tarascan groups dominated several regions, the Tzacoalco salt mines owned by Tecos, because of this their leader Coliman or Tlatoani Colimotl defeated them, after the salt war, the Tecos took Sayula, Zapotln and Amula and even reached Mazamitla, becoming the predominant group. 

Culture origin
Archaeologists recognize the origin of Mesoamerica in a mother culture represented by the Olmec style and culture. But in the western region no evidence has been found to date nothing that can be identified as such, cite web  first=   Beatriz  last=  Braniff C.  title=  Colima en los tiempos prehispnicos  url=  http://www.mexicodesconocido.com.mx/colima-en-los-tiempos-prehispanicos.html publisher= Mexico desconocido   location=  language= Spanish trans_title= Colima in prehispanic times   year=  accessdate=Sept. 2010 because no evidence of Teotihuacan influence has been found, or typically Mesoamerican.

It is clear that Colima and other western regions had their own personality. The Colima artistic expressions in ceramic offerings in shaft tombs, reflect a society more comfortable, free, equal, with family and household traits, totally different from artistic expressions of other societies. The detail and artistic quality of women, men, dogs, parrots, bats, snakes, etc., sculptures, evidence that artists carefully observed those everyday items.  

Who were these special ancestors? Recent excavations in Colima and Michoacn enable us to recognize at least two roots, as old as the Olmec. Capacha, before 1500 BCE had burials that include beautiful ceramic bules and vases with Stirrup handle, certain type figurines and metates.

Discovery
It was discovered and studied by Elizabeth Trusdell-Kelly, American archaeologist who made excavations in the Colima area in 1939. Similarities between pieces of this culture and contemporary ceramics in the region of Ecuador suggest that there were some very the early western mesoamerican cultures and those of the Andes. 

Capacha Culture
By this name is known the Capacha archaeological site in Colima. Was the first with complex features and developed in the region, approximately between 2000 and 1200 BCE.
 
Capacha was contemporary of other important regional cultural developments, such as El Opeo, Michoacn, and the first Tlatilcophase in the Valley Mexico. The geographical spread of ceramic Capacha parts covers the Pacific coast, between the Mexican States of Sinaloa, in the north, and Guerrero in south. Particularly important are the burials discovered by Gordon f. Ekholm in Guasave, Sinaloa.


Cultural Stages
The cultural development of this area has been divided into seven phases, named for the sites where findings were made; cite web  first=   Olga  last=  Cano  title=  Colima y sus tesoros, Numero 52  url=  http://www.arqueomex.com/S8N4GVesp52.html publisher=   Arqueologa Mexicana  location=  language= Spanish trans_title= Colima and its treasures, number 52  year=  accessdate=Sept. 2010 

 Capacha Phase 
 Ortices Phase 
 Comala Phase 
 Colima Phase 
 Armera Phase 
 Chanal Phase and
 Periquillos Phase. 

Cultures Chronology

 align=centre   class=wikitable   style=margin: 1em auto 1em auto
 +Western Culture Chronology in Colima 
! Period
!colspan=2  From Year
! to year
! Description
 -
 rowspan=1 Early Preclassical
 colspan=2  2500 BCE
  1200 BCE
  Early Preclassical
 -
 rowspan=1  Capacha Phase 
 colspan=2  1500 BCE
  1000 BCE
  Pottery was associated to funeral rites. The pottery characteristic shapes were guaje or bule 
 -
 rowspan=1 Mid-Preclassical
 colspan=2  1200 BCE
  400 BCE
  Mid-Preclassical
 -
 rowspan=1  Ortices Phase 
 colspan=2  500 BCE
  500 CE
  Shaft tombs develop, burial chambers below ground, with anthropomorphic or zoomorphic vessels
 -
 rowspan=1  Late Preclassical
 colspan=2  400 BCE
  200 CE
  Ortices Phase continues and Comala Phase begins
 -
 rowspan=1 Early Classical
 colspan=2  200 CE
  600 CE
  Early Classical
 -
 rowspan=1  Comala Phase 
 colspan=2  100 CE
  700 CE
  The Shaft Tomb tradition continued. Ceramics reached its maximum aesthetic development, with beautiful pieces 
 -
 rowspan=1  Colima Phase
 colspan=2  400 CE
  600 CE
  Gradual disappearance of the shaft tomb tradition and emergence of planned cities, with plazas and mounds. Fabrication of stone figures. Ceramics ceased to be refined and became more utilitarian
 -
 rowspan=1 Late Classical
 colspan=2  600  CE
  900 CE
  From this period there is influence from Mesoamerica canons 
 -
 rowspan=1  Armera Phase 
 colspan=2  500  CE
  1000  CE
  Ceramics is geometric with simple and linear decoration 
 -
 rowspan=1 Early Postclassical
 colspan=2  900  CE
  1200  CE
  Early Postclassical
 -
 rowspan=1  Chanal Phase 
 colspan=2 600   CE
  1500  CE
  Cities such as El Chanal appear, similar to the highlands, which integrate stone elements with gods representations. Ceramic figures become solid and metal artifacts are made
 -
 rowspan=1  Late Postclassical
 colspan=2 1200  CE
  1521  CE
  Late Postclassical
 -
 rowspan=1  Periquillos Phase 
 colspan=2  1000 CE
  1500  CE
  Three Lordships have military and commercial control: Aliman, Coliman and Cihuatlan-Tepetitango. Pottery is rough with more stylized traits and primitive appearance.
 -
 colspan=5 Source: Cano, Olga, Colima and its treasures, Arqueologia Mexicana.
 

The Capacha Culture Includes the ceramics production that chronologically and geographically defines, the cultural life of the Group. includes nine sites identified in the eastern half of the Colima State. Archaeological elements of this tradition have been discovered in the states of Nayarit, Jalisco, Sinaloa, Guerrero, the Morelos, Michoacn and Mexico.S. T. Evans, 2004: p. 156 / D. Lvine, 1998: p. 57 et pp. 68-69 / J. B. Mountjoy, 1994: p. 40 / E. Taladoire et B. Faugre-Kalfon, 1995 : p. 87.

Among this sites are the following:

El Opeo
El Opeo is an archaeological site located in the municipality of Jacona, in the Michoacn state, Mxico. It is home to a prehispanic site, mainly known from the ceramic material found in the funerary complexes of the site, which have been dated to the late preclassical mesoamerican period. The importance of this site in mesoamerican archaeology is due to its antiquity and the ample diffusion of its style, contemporary to other native culture developments such as the Capacha culture and earlier of the Chupcuaro. El Opeo tombs are the oldest in Mesoamerica. Have been dated to around 1600 BCE, hence they predate de Olmec culture development, with main centers in the Gulf of Mexico coast and flourished some centuries later.

La Campana
La Campana is an archaeological site located a few kilometers from Capacha, it is included in the Mexican archaeological heritage list since 1917. Located in the vicinity of the city of Colima. This site was the largest prehispanic population center in western Mexico. Site studies indicate that some of its features are related to the classical period Teotihuacan culture. cite web  first=   last=   title=  Historia del Estado de Colima  url= http://es.wikipedia.org/wiki/Colima#Historia  publisher= Wikipedia  location=   language= Spanish  trans_title= History of the State of Colima   year=  accessdate= Sept. 2010  
 
Los Ortices Complex
Archaeologists assign a period between 300 BCE and 300 CE; located southwest of Colima, in the vicinity of the Los Ortices village. This native settlement was more evolved than the Capacha site, they produced finer pottery, also made stone sculpture and buried their dead  in shaft tombs, very characteristic of the region.

Armera & Colima Complex
Chronologically placed between 600-1100 CE, in an area east of the Colima city, in the El Moralete neighborhood. This native group developed crafts with features somewhat more primitive than the others. Developed a smaller ceramics variety and built rougher shaft tombs.

El Chanal Complex
El Chanal site developed the most representative style of the region, settled in the El Chanal community. In the mid-20th century a step pyramid was found; at the beginning of 1990s, discovered esplanades, temples, squares and a ballgame court: architectural evidence of a culture that had reached a high degree of evolution. By 1520, this complex had already disappeared and only remained in the area some native peoples, apparently subjected to another more powerful city, Tecomn.


Important Aspects
This important site and its cultural development, enabled the generation of several important civilization aspects, among which are the following:

Capacha Ceramic Tradition 
Shaft Tomb Tradition.
Relationship evidence with South America.

Capacha Ceramic
File:Vasija capacha.jpg thumb 300px Capacha Culture Vessel.
Sample testing of ceramic specimens found in various sites of the Colima State, San Blas, Ixtapa and Tomatln Jalisco by Thermo-luminescence and carbon 14 have provided dates between 1320 and 220 BCE Ch. Duverger, 1999 : p. 177 et p. 183 / D. Lvine, 1998 : p. 68 / J. B. Mountjoy, op. cit.

Ceramic features

Capacha ceramic originality is based on two specific types:D. Lvine, 1998: p. 69 / J. B. Mountjoy, 1994: pp. 41-42 / E. Taladoire & B. Faugre-Kalfon, p.87.

 Large ceramic vessels, shaped as two globular stacked vases, one over the other. Named Bule.S. T. Evans, p. 121

Ceramics that consists of two superimposed globular vessels, interconnected by two or three tubes. This ceramic shape resembles the South American stirrup handle ceramic tradition.

Shaft Tombs
Ceramic from Colima cultures, was primarily deposited as offering in shaft tombs.

Shaft Tombs and its offerings:

One of the most representative characteristics of the culture are the shaft tombs, funeral chambers with access through a shaft, hence its name.  

Construction was normally made by digging on tepetate, with a depth varying depending on the soil hardness; sometimes with steps or a vertical circular duct, with a diameter of 1.20 to 1.40 m, used to reach one, two or three small chambers, resembling a baker's oven, where the offerings were placed next to the deceased. 

Offerings could include ceramics with different motifs; men or women in some activity, and testimony of their kind of life e.g. hunters, musicians, farmers with their belongings and clothing. Could also include parts of everyday use or ornament and their nahual,The nahual was an animal that could be a parrot, a duck, a snake, but it was usually a dog: these animals popularly became bald dogs or izcuintli, known as the emblem and a very representative figures of Colima, there are similar figures in the mochica culture of Peru. trip mate to the underworld, disguised as the death God, that leads or guide the soul of the dead through the nine torrents that separate the deceased from heaven.  

At the end of the funeral ceremony, the tombs were sealed with stone slabs or metates and the shaft filled with dirt. This type of burial chambers appeared during the Mid-Preclassical and the early classical; In addition to western Mexico, these are also found in Colombia. 

The disappearance of this funerary tradition, established a change in deity worship, this probably led to the construction of ceremonial centers and plazas, as a result of the arrival of migrants from highlands groups. This is considered, because from the Armeria Phase 500-1000 CE ceramics features changed and defensive constructions and representations of highland Gods, like Tlloc and Huehueteotl appeared. During the Chanal phase 600-1500 CE cities such as El Chanal and La Campana were built, with plazas, platforms, and pyramids built with stones, a characteristic aspect of the area architecture. 

South America
It is interesting to note the similarities between western Mexico and South America, since in regions of both places shaft tombs were built. Recent studies have found common elements with countries as far away as Colombia, Ecuador and Peru, it is inferred that there was some type of contact perhaps by ocean navigation. Evidence was found in Treasure Beach 200-700 CE, on the Colima coast.  

The nahual included in tombs, various animal shapes are very similar to those of the mochica culture in Peru.  

Notes
Reflist

 References 
 Braniff Cornejo, Beatriz. Introduccin a la Arqueologa del Occidente de Mxico. INAH-Universidad de Colima, 2004. ISBN 970-35-0297-0 es icon

Bibliography
Ch. Duverger, La Mso-Amrique: L'art pr-hispanique du Mexique et de l'Amrique centrale, Flammarion, Paris, 1999. fr icon
S. T. Evans, Ancient Mexico & central America: Archaeology and culture history, Thames & Hudson, London, 2004. 
D. Lvine, Archologie du Mexique. Les cultures prhispaniques de l'Ouest mexicain: L'tat de Colima, ditions Artcom', Paris, 1998.  fr icon
J. B. Mountjoy, Capacha: Una cultura enigmtica del Occidente de Mxico, en: Arqueologa mexicana, volume 02, numro: 09, Mxico, 1994. es icon
P. S. Schoenberg, La poca prehispnica en Guerrero, in: Arqueologa mexicana, volumen 14, nmero 94, Mxico, 2006. es icon
E. Taladoire & B. Faugre-Kalfon, Archologie et art prcolombiens: La Msoamrique, cole du Louvre, Runion des Muses Nationaux, La Documentation Franaise, Paris, 1995. fr icon


Also See
Colima, Colima Colima Municipality
Colima Colima State
El Chanal
El Opeo
La Campana

External links
http://www.colima.gob.mx/2010/php/ser/?eCodSeccion=1 Colima Government, Official Site

Category:Archaeology
Category:Mesoamerica
Category:Mesoamerican sites
Category:Archaeological sites in Mexico
Category:Archaeological sites in Colima

be: 
es:Cultura de Capacha
fr:Complexe cramique Capacha
pt:Cultura Capacha
ru: 
