
The Drake Well is a  deep oil well in Cherrytree Township, Venango County in the U.S. state of Pennsylvania. The well is the centerpiece of the Drake Well Museum located  south of Titusville.
Drilled by Edwin Drake in 1859, along the banks of Oil Creek, it is the first commerical oil well in the United States. Drake Well was listed on National Register of Historic Places and designated a National Historic Landmark in 1966. It was designated a Historic Mechanical Engineering Landmark in 1979. The well was designated a National Historic Chemical Landmark in 2009, on the sesquicentennial of the strike.
Location and geology
The Drake Well is located in Cherrytree Township, Venango County in northwestern Pennsylvania. situated on the flats  from the east bank of Oil Creek. The site was originally on an artificial island formed by the creek and a mill race.1 On a floodplain, the well and the museum are protected by an earthen dike.2
Most of the oil produced in northwestern Pennsylvania was formed in sandstone reservoir rocks at the boundary between the Mississippian and Devonian rock layers.3 Over time, the oil migrated toward the surface, became trapped beneath an impervious layer of caprock, and formed a reservoir. The presence of upwards-curving folds in the caprock called anticlines, or sometimes an inversion of an anticline called a syncline, greatly varied the depth of the reservoirs, from around  to just beneath the surface.45
History
Petroleum found along Oil Creek was known to Native Americans for hundreds of years through natural seeps.6 Europeans became aware of the existence of petroleum in the 1600s. At the time, this &quot;mineral-oil&quot; was used primarily for medicinal purposes and was reputed to cure many ailments, including rheumatism and arthritis.7 Around 1848, Samuel Kier realized the pontential of the medicinal oil as an illuminant. Kier distilled the oil to make it more suitable in lamps by removing the odor and impurities that created soot when burned.8 A sample of oil was brought to Dartmouth College by Francis B. Brewer from the Watson, Brewer and Company Farm on Oil Creek around 1853. The sample was acquired by George Bissell who, along with Jonathan G. Eveleth purchased the farm for $5,000.9 Bissell and Eveleth took another sample of oil to Benjamin Silliman at Yale University in 1855 for further investigation. Silliman's report confirmed the quality of the petroleum and described the distallation processes needed to produce kerosene.10 The Pennsylvania Rock Oil Company was incorporated and the farm tranfered to the company.11
Construction and operation
Edwin Drake, a former conductor for the New York and New Haven Railroad, invested $200, his entire savings, into the Pennsylvania Rock Oil Company.12 Drake became more involved in the company and traveled to Titusville, Pennsylvania and the Brewer and Watson Farm in December 1857. His report prompted Bissell and Eveleth to organize the Seneca Oil Company in Connecticut in March 1858 and to place Drake in charge of producing petroleum.1314 Because Drake decided that drilling in the manner of salt wells would yield more petroleum than conventional digging, he hired William A. Smith, a Tarentum-blacksmith and salt-well driller, to aid in the endeavor.15 An engine house and derrick were constructed, and Drake purchased a , horizontal steam engine. The steam engine was used to ram the drill through the soil until it reached bedrock  down. After it was found that groundwater would cause the walls of the hole to collapse, Drake acquired  of cast iron pipe to stabilize the hole.16 After reaching bedrock, Drake and Smith were able to drill at a rate of  per day.17 Drake's colleagues back in Connecticut gave up on finding any oil by April 1859 and after spending $2,500; Drake took out a $500 loan to keep the operation going.18 The drill reached its maximun depth of  on August 27, 1859. Smith visited the well the next day and found oil visible on top of the water  from the top of the well.19 The oringial structures at the well caught fire in October 1859 and were rebuilt by Drake a month later. The well produced  a day, but, after the price of plummetted from the resulting oil boom, it was never profitable.20 The well stopped producing in 1861 and the Seneca Oil Company sold the property in 1864. The derrick was moved in 1876 to the Centennial Exposition in Philadelphia.21
Preservation
The well remained abandoned until 1889, when David Emery of Titusville bought the site, erected a derrick and cleaned out the well. Emery was able to obtain a small quantity of petroleum from the well and attempted to sell it as souvenirs to raise funds &quot;to perpetuate the site&quot;, but died before he was able to do so.22 His widow donated the  that included the well to the Canadohta Chapter of the Daughters of the American Revolution in 1913.
Drake Well was listed on National Register of Historic Places and designated a National Historic Landmark on November 13, 1966 by the National Park Service.2324 It was designated a Historic Mechanical Engineering Landmark by the American Society of Mechanical Engineers in October 1979.25 The American Chemical Society designated the Drake Well a National Historic Chemical Landmark on August 27, 2009, the 150th anniversary of the strike.26
Museum and park

See also


List of Historic Mechanical Engineering Landmarks
List of National Historic Landmarks in Pennsylvania
National Register of Historic Places listings in Venango County, Pennsylvania

References

Sources









External links


Drake Well Museum


ja:&lt;U+30C9&gt;&lt;U+30EC&gt;&lt;U+30FC&gt;&lt;U+30AF&gt;&lt;U+6CB9&gt;&lt;U+7530&gt;
Category:Buildings and structures completed in 1859 Category:History of Pennsylvania Category:Historic Mechanical Engineering Landmarks Category:National Historic Landmarks in Pennsylvania Category:National Register of Historic Places in Pennsylvania Category:Oil wells Category:Visitor attractions in Venango County, Pennsylvania



Pees, p. 14.↩

Caplinger, p. 6.↩

Caplinger, p. 4.↩

Caplinger, p. 12.↩
Caplinger, p. 13.↩


Bell, p. 310.↩
McKithan, § 8, p. 1.↩





↩


Sherman, p. 34.↩


↩
↩
↩


