
Alone in Snakebite Canyon is a 1998 novel which is part of the Give Yourself Goosebumps series. This &quot;Choose Your Own Adventure&quot; fictional work was first printed March of 1998 on Scholastic Press. This is the only book in the series that is still in print in the United States.
The book was based on and adapted from Robert Kahn's original 1956 novel of the same name. Stine trimmed most of the original plot out for this version and added new pages and multiple endings, then mixing the pages all up, thus giving you this gamebook version.
Plot
The plot of the book is that you, your parents and your annoying older brother, Pete, go to Lonestar National Park (Snakebite Canyon). While camping in the desert you find a shop and can buy one of two valuable items: a pair of magic snake eyes that will allow you to transform into different animals or a map to an old (and deadly) gold mine. The Visitors Center shop at Snakebite Canyon looks sooo boring, and the shopkeeper has to be crazy. That's just what YOU think.
If you buy the eyes, the animal transformation part of the novel offers a lot of entertaining possibilities, like a bear, a fish or a falcon. But the original owner wants them back. And he's one angry old rattlesnake! There is also a way that the reader can leave this storyline and try the other one: become a bat and then take a ride on an old dusty ore car. Endings in this storyline vary from being in a zoo, death, scaring some tourists, returning to normal (but with fangs), being bagged as a rattlesnake into a sack, becoming a bear and sent to be watched by scientists or being sent to Alaska, where you remain a bear forever. But you will need to be careful because in one of the branches, you might swallow a snake eye and in that one's ending, you would need to over-eat! Strangely, it is only in this ending that this effect is a problem.
If you buy the map, the Lost Gold Mine features a fun little riddle that actually requires a few moments of thought to solve. &quot;Beware the panther though!&quot; the Watchers of the Mine (who are made of eyeballs) would say, if you came across them and they gave you a key. The alternative way in is up a windy path. Choose the panels wisely when you get there. A key is in one of them. You could strike it rich. Or you could get attacked by a giant kid-eating spider! Endings in this storyline vary from guarding the Lost Mine, striking it rich, being caught by the Watchers, a trap eating you, death, to being stuck in the rocks all day. Now, don't start getting difficult. We know the Mine can't be lost if it's on a map. It's not the Mine that's lost, just all the people who've ever entered it...
See also

The original Alone in Snakebite Canyon
Give Yourself Goosebumps
List of Goosebumps books

External links

Alone in Snakebite Canyon at Gamebooks.org
Alone at Snakebie Canyon at Fantastic Fiction
Alone at Snakebite Canyon at World Retail Store
Alone in Snakebite Canyon at Kid's Catalog Web
Alone in Snakebite Canyon at Libraries Online

Category:Give Yourself Goosebumps
