
Deerwood is the oldest gated community and country club in Jacksonville, Florida. After it was established in the mid-1960s, it was the most exclusive residential area in Jacksonville and remains so today, with round-the-clock guard service at both entrances and high standards for membership and residency.1 The golf course hosted the Greater Jacksonville Open in the late 1960s and early 1970s, forerunner of The Players Championship, and was once the site of talks between President Gerald Ford and Egyptian President Anwar Sadat in November, 1975.23
History
Richard Green Skinner came to Jacksonville in 1899 in search of pine trees for harvesting sap to produce turpentine for his marine supply business. Land to the south and east of the St. Johns River was mostly pine trees, sand dunes or marsh; inhabited by wildlife. After 1900, the Skinner family owned close to 40,000 acres. That land was distributed to his six sons in the 1920s. The oldest brother, Bright, and two other brothers moved to Tampa and received the land owned there. The acreage nearest to the downtown went to Ben Skinner, who built the Skinner Dairy and Farm, which was developed as Southpoint in the late 1970s.
Chester and Richard were given the biggest tracts because the land was quite remote&lt;U+2014&gt;miles from existing roads.4 Richard Skinner, in turn, gave his children, Richard, Jr., Bryant, and Dottie his land, including the property on which Deerwood would be built.
Bryant built the golf course in 1961, designed by notable golf course architect George Cobb. He then built the first home in the Deerwood development (his own) the following year. His brother Richard Jr. built a home there in 1963. In early 1962, Bryant began to outline and layout a unique (for Jacksonville) and exclusive gated golf community that would become Deerwood. Within his rural Florida location he envisioned a neighborhood that incorporated curving roadways, panoramas, and distinctive homes on voluminous lots with large open common areas incorporating lakes, built around a country club that would feature golf, swimming and tennis.5 The development was named Deerwood because of an abundance of wildlife: turkeys, wild hogs, raccoons, bears and lots of deer.6
Bryant was confident that people would embrace it, but to get there from the established city required an eight mile drive down U.S. 1 (Philips Highway), then east for three bumpy miles on a rough dirt road named San Clerc, which would eventually become Baymeadows Road. In 1960, the area south of Beach Boulevard, east of US 1, and extending ten miles to the Intracoastal Waterway (approximately 50 square miles) was wilderness consisting of sand dunes and pine trees. In order to solve the problem of their isolated location, the Skinners donated land and convinced the Jacksonville Expressway Authority to build a road that would connect Beach Boulevard to Philips Highway. That thoroughfare, now called Southside Boulevard, opened Deerwood to development. In the 1970s, they gave land for Butler Boulevard, which opened more of their property, as did the extension of Baymeadows Road, east from Southside Blvd to a point where Florida State Road 9A was built. The Skinners also donated about 500 acres for the campus of what is now the University of North Florida.7
Bryant Skinner worked for Jacksonville's Stockton, Whatley, Davin &amp; Co. (SWD), the largest mortgage banking, real estate and insurance business in Northeast Florida. The Skinners had abundant land, but not the financial resources necessary to develop his Deerwood project. J.J. Daniel became president of SWD in 1960 and made a deal to purchase Deerwood's 900 acres from the Skinners. SWD financed the development of Deerwood Country Club. Bryant Skinner quit his job at SWD to concentrate on selling homes around the new golf course and started his own firm. The Bryant Skinner Company eventually became one of Jacksonville's most successful real estate development businesses. In 1980, they combined with Gate Petroleum to develop the 250-acre Southpoint office park.8
Don Davis was named General Manager of Deerwood Country Club in 1965, a position he held for over 20 years. In 1978, Davis was promoted to Operations Vice President of SWD, responsible for all Deerwood Club operations, including the sale of residences and home sites. In 1979, 86 families lived at Deerwood.9
Gate Petroleum purchased the real estate assets of SWD in 1983, which included ownership of Deerwood Country Club. A group of Deerwood homeowners tried to buy the club assets for $3.1 million in 1990, but were unable to convince enough members to join the effort.10 Gate, which also owns Epping Forest Yacht Club and Ponte Vedra Inn and Club, operated Deerwood until 1999, when 400 club members agreed to buy the club assets for between $5 and $6 million, becoming member-owned.1112
Country Club
The Deerwood Country Club has an 18-hole golf course &amp; driving range, fitness center, Olympic-size swimming pool, tennis facility with 12 Har-Tru courts (8 lighted), community walk and clubhouse.13 A private primary and secondary school is located within the gates, as is a 3-acre recreation area that includes a basketball court, multi-purpose ball field, unique playground and pavilion.
The original golf clubhouse, designed by KBJ Architects and constructed in the 1960s, was demolished after a new, 25,000-square-foot clubhouse opened in December, 2004. The new building is elevated to allow views of the natural beauty of the golf course and surrounding lakes. The facility has multiple private rooms for member functions, a formal dining room and shaded outdoor patio areas.14
When Deerwood first opened, there was plenty of room for a riding stable and bridle paths. Nearly every resident belonged to the Country Club. Today, only 25% of the residents are members. Part of that is financial; the initiation fee is $21,000, then $163 (social) to $349 (golf) dues per month. However, there are almost as many non-residents who are Deerwood Country Club members as residents. When the Deerwood board made the decision to build a new clubhouse and renovate the golf course, members were assessed a $12,000 fee to pay for it.15
Today, the property entrances are adorned with life-size bronze stags and does; a reminder of a time when deer were plentiful and people were scarce.16
Homes
The area encompassed by Deerwood Country Club was initially limited to single family residences for many years. Condominium developments, zero lot line homes, and courtyard communities were gradually included as the development matured and demand for them increased. Homesites ranged up to a twenty-acre estate, with some five-acre parcels, but the average lot is over &lt;U+00BD&gt; acre.17 Deerwood is now mostly built out, with approximately 900 families in homes priced above $400,000. The intersection of Baymeadows Road and Southside Boulevard, near the Deerwood entrance, is one of the busiest intersections in town. The Tinseltown commercial center is a couple of miles north. The Avenues Mall is two miles south. And there are tens of thousands of people living in dozens of developments off Southside Boulevard and Baymeadows Road. Many homes are over forty years old, so it is not unusual for someone to demolish an older home and build a new custom home. Many of the larger properties are located on the east side of the development in a community known as &quot;The Estates&quot;.18
In the summer of 2005, a local developer paid $2.6 million to purchase 140 acres on the north end of the country club&lt;U+2014&gt;the last large undeveloped parcel, which was mostly wetlands viewed as too expensive to develop. The Collins Group plotted 26 one-acre homesites for multi-million dollar homes while reserving 100 acres for conservation.19 The homes were expected to be a minimum of 5,000 square feet, with a total cost starting at $1.5 million.20
CC&amp;R
Every deed in Deerwood includes a comprehensive set of Covenants, Conditions and Restrictions (CC&amp;Rs) which establish and permit enforcement of standards. They enable the controlled access to the community, and authorize the Deerwood Improvement Association to provide infrastructure including recreational areas, drainage, road maintenance and common areas.21 KBJ Architects developed the design standards for residential developments at Deerwood, which were also used at Amelia Island Plantation.22
References

External links

Deerwood Country Club website

Category:Sports culture Category:Golf clubs and courses Category:Gated communities Category:Neighborhoods in Jacksonville, Florida Category:History of Jacksonville, Florida Category:Wikipedia Did you know articles



Patton, Charlie: &quot;Picture this: Deerwood, deserted&quot; Florida Times-Union, February 21, 2003↩
Brune-Mathis, Karen: &quot;Deerwood rift definitely newsworthy&quot; Florida Times-Union, August 28, 2005↩
↩
Patton, Charlie: &quot;Piney Woods Miracle&quot; Florida Times-Union, November 23, 2000↩
Beadling, Les: &quot;President's Message&quot; Deerwood Community News, Winter 2006↩


Newboy: the Autobiography of Herbert Hill Peyton, page 145, Herbert Hill Peyton, ISBN 0965827704↩

Barker-Benfield, Simon: &quot;Deerwood club may be in play&quot; Florida Times-Union, April 28, 1999↩
Trinidad, Alison: &quot;Rift develops in Deerwood&quot; Florida Times-Union, August 25, 2005↩
Barton, Susanna: &quot;Peyton renovating one club, wants to get out of another&quot; Jacksonville Business Journal, May 28, 1999↩

&quot;Dining&quot; Deerwood Country Club↩


&quot;Deerwood Golf &amp; Country Club&quot; Bring You Home↩
&quot;Deerwood Country Club Jacksonville&quot; First Coast Real Estate↩
Flaisig, Liz: &quot;Developer pays $2.6M for Deerwood tract&quot; Jacksonville Business Journal, August 29, 2005↩


Kerr, Jessie-Lynne: &quot;Architect transformed city waterfront&quot; Florida Times-Union, January 24, 2008↩


