

Lie Kim Hok (; 1 November 1853 &lt;U+2013&gt; 6 May 1912) was a peranakan Chinese teacher, writer, and social worker active in the Dutch East Indies. Born in Bogor, West Java, Lie received his formal education in missionary schools and by the 1870s was fluent in Sundanese, vernacular Malay, and Dutch &lt;U+2013&gt; he was unable to understand Chinese. In the mid-1870s Lie married and edited two periodicals published by his teacher and mentor D. J. van der Linden; after his wife died Lie quit this position. In 1884 Lie published his first books, including the critically acclaimed syair (poem) Sair Tjerita Siti Akbari and grammar Malajoe Batawi. When van der Linden died in 1885, Lie purchased the printing press and opened his own company.
Over the following two years Lie published numerous books, including Tjhit Liap Seng, considered the first Chinese Malay novel; Lie also acquired printing rights for Pembrita Betawi, a newspaper based in Batavia (now Jakarta) and moved to the city. After he sold his printing press in 1887, Lie spent three years working various odd jobs until he found stability at a rice mill operated by his friend in 1890. The following year he married Tan Sioe Nio; the couple had four children. Lie published two books in the 1890s and, in 1900, became a founding member of the Chinese organisation Tiong Hoa Hwe Koan, which he left in 1904. Lie focused on his translations and social work for the remainder of his life, until his death of typhus at age 58.
Lie has been considered influential in the colony's journalism, linguistics, and literature; he is best remembered for his contributions to the latter field, having been styled the &quot;father of Chinese Malay literature&quot; in recognition of his work. Several of his writings saw multiple printings, and Sair Tjerita Siti Akbari was adapted for the stage and film. However, as a result of the language politics in the Indies and independent Indonesia he has become marginalised. When several of his writings were revealed as uncredited adaptations of exisiting works, Lie was criticised as unoriginal. This conclusion has been debated by several critics, who have found evidence of innovation in Lie's writing style and handling of plots.
Early life
Lie was born in Bogor, West Java, on 1 November 1853, the first child of seven born to Lie Hian Tjouw and his second wife Oey Tjiok Nio; the elder Lie had four children from a previous marriage. The well-to-do peranakan Chinese couple was living in Cianjur at the time but had gone to Bogor to give birth as they had family there. The family soon returned to Cianjur, where Lie Kim Hok was homeschooled in Chinese tradition and the local Sundanese culture and language. By age seven he could haltingly read Sundanese and Malay.
In the mid-18th century the colony's ethnic Chinese population was severely undereducated, unable to enter schools for Europeans or natives. At age ten he was enrolled in a Calvinist missionary school run by Christiaan Albers. This school had roughly 60 male students, mostly Chinese. Under Albers, a fluent speaker of Sundanese, Lie received his formal education, including the sciences, language, and Christianty &lt;U+2013&gt; the schools were meant to promote Christianity in the Dutch East Indies, and students were required to pray before class. Lie &lt;U+2013&gt; as with most students &lt;U+2013&gt; did not convert, although biographer Tio Ie Soei writes that the religion likely affected his world view.
 Lie and his family returned to Bogor in 1866. At the time there were no schools offering a European-style education in the city, and thus Lie was sent to a Chinese-run school. For three years, in which Lie studied under three different headmasters, he was made to repeat traditional Hokkien phrases and copy Chinese characters without understanding them. Tio suggests that Lie obtained little knowledge at the school, and until his death Lie was unable to speak Chinese. During his time in Bogor Lie studied painting under Raden Saleh, a friend of his father's. Although he reportedly showed skill, he did not continue the hobby as his mother disapproved. He also showed a propensity for traditional literary forms such as pantun.
When Sierk Coolsma opened a missionary school on 31 May 1869, Lie was in the first class of ten. Once again studying in Sundanese, Lie studied similar subjects to his time in Cianjur; around this time he began studying Dutch. After a government-run school opened in 1872, most of Lie's classmates were ethnic Chinese; the Sundanese students, mostly Muslim, had transferred to the new school for fear of being converted. In 1873 Coolsma was tasked to Sumedang to translate the Bible into Sundanese and was replaced by D. J. van der Linden. Studies resumed, using Malay as van der Linden was unable to speak Sundanese. Lie and his new headmaster soon became close. The two would work together at van der Linden's school and publishing house and shared an interest in the traditional theatre, including wayang.
Teacher and publisher
Lie had soon begun assisting van der Linden with the school, and in the mid-1870s operated his own for poor children. Lie likewise worked for the missionary's printing press, Zending Pers, earning forty gulden a month while serving as editor of two religious magazines, the Dutch-language monthly De Opwekker and the Malay-language bi-weekly Bintang Djohor.  In 1876 he married Oey Pek Nio, seven years his younger; Tio, in an interview with scholar of Chinese Malay literature Claudine Salmon, stated that Lie had been betrothed to Oey's elder sister , but when she ran away the night before the ceremony Lie was told to marry Oey Pek Nio to save face. Lie was displeased with the marriage, but followed through under his parent's urgings. The pair soon grew close, and the following year they had their first child; the baby died soon after birth. Lie's mother died in 1879, and his father died the following year.
 Following these deaths Lie sold his school to Oey Kim Hoat and left his position at Zending Pers to ensure his family's financial stability. In 1881 Oey Pek Nio gave birth to another child, but died soon afterwards. As Lie was unable to take care of the child, the baby was sent to live with Lie's father-in-law in Gadok, but died in 1886. Three years later Lie published his first books. Two of these, Kitab Edja and Sobat Anak-Anak, were published by Zending Pers; the former was a study book to help students learn to write Malay, while the latter was a collection of stories for children which Aprinus Salam of Gadjah Mada University credits as the first work of popular literature in the Indies. The other two books were published by W. Bruining &amp; Co., based in the colonial capital at Batavia (now Jakarta). One of these, Malajoe Batawi, was a grammar of Malay intended to standardise the language's spelling. The other was the four-volume syair (poem) Sair Tjerita Siti Akbari; this book, dealing with a gender disguised warrior who conquers the Sultanate of Hindustan to save her husband, became one of Lie's best known works.
After van der Linden's death in 1885, Lie paid his teacher's widow a total of 1,000 gulden to acquire the Zending Pers. He changed the printer's name to Lie Kim Hok soon afterwards. He devoted most of his time to the publishing house and it grew quickly, printing works by other authors and reprinting some of Lie's earlier works; the publishing house was, however, unable to turn a profit. That year Lie published a new syair, consisting of 24 quartets, entitled Orang Prampoewan. He also wrote opinion pieces in various newspapers, including Bintang Betawi and Domingoe.
The following year Lie purchased publishing rights to the Malay-language newspaper Pembrita Betawi, based in Batavia and edited by W. Meulenhoff, for 1000 gulden. The publishing house was moved to Batavia soon after and, beginning in mid-1886, Lie's publishing house was credited as printer. While busy with the press Lie wrote or contributed to four books: two pieces of nonfiction, one a collection of Chinese prophecies and the other detailing lease laws; a translation of the One Thousand and One Nights, a collection already popular with Malay audiences; and a single novel, Tjhit Liap Seng. Following a group of educated persons in mainland China, Tjhit Liap Seng is credited as the first Malay Chinese novel.
Lie continued to publish novels set in China through 1887, writing five in this period. Several of these stories were based on extant Chinese tales, as retold by Lie's Chinese-speaking friends. Lie sold his shares in Pembrita Betawi to Karsseboom &amp; Co. the following year. He continued to print the newspaper until it &lt;U+2013&gt; and Lie's printing press &lt;U+2013&gt; were acquired by Albrecht &amp; Co. Lie would not work as a publisher again, although he continued to contribute writings to various newspapers, including Meulenhoff's new publication Hindia Olanda. He spent the next three years working a multitude of jobs, including bamboo salesman, contractor, and cashier.
Tiong Hoa Hwe Koan, translations, and death
In 1890 Lie began to work at a rice mill operated by his friend Tan Wie Siong; this would remain his main source of income for the remainder of his life. The following year he married Tan Sioe Nio, twenty years his younger. The new couple had a comfortable life: Lie received an adequate salary and the work did not consume much energy. To supplement his income Lie returned to translating, Dutch to Malay or vice-versa. Sometimes he would translate land deeds or other legal documents. Other times he translated works of literature. This included, in 1894, De Graaf de Monte Cristo, a translation of Alexandre Dumas' Le Comte de Monte-Cristo in collaboration with the Indo journalist F. Wiggers. Lie and Wiggers included footnotes to describe aspects of European culture they deemed difficult to understand for non-European readers. Three years later Lie published a book on the teachings of Confucius. Entitled Hikayat Kong Hoe Tjoe, the book's contents were derived from European writings on Confucianism and his friends' explanations.
 With nineteen other ethnic Chinese, including his former schoolmate Phoa Keng Hek, Lie was an establishing member of the Tiong Hoa Hwe Koan (THHK) school system and social organisation in 1900. Meant to promote ethnic Chinese rights at a time when they were treated as second-class citizens and provide standardised formal education to ethnic Chinese students where the Dutch had not, the organisation was based on the teachings of Confucius and opened schools for both boys and girls. The THHK grew quickly and expanded into different fields; Lie would help organise a debating club, sports club, and charity fairs and concerts. Lie spent 1903 and 1904 as a managing member of the board, serving mainly as its treasurer.
Lie left the THHK in 1904, although he remained active in social work. Despite increasingly poor health Lie wrote opinion pieces for the dailies Sin Po and Perniagaan. He also translated extensively. In 1905 Lie published the first volume of his last Chinese-themed novel, Pembalasan Dendam Hati. This was followed in 1908 by Kapitein Flamberge, a translation of Paul Sauni&lt;U+00E8&gt;re's Le Capitaine Belle-Humeur. The following years saw him translate several books starring Pierre Alexis Ponson du Terrail's character Rocambole, beginning with Kawanan Pendjahat in 1910. Two final translations, Genevi&lt;U+00E8&gt;ve de Vadans from a book entitled De Juffrouw van Gezelschap and Prampoean jang Terdjoewal from Hugo Hartmann's Dolores, de Verkochte Vrouw, were published in newspapers and collated as novels after Lie's death; the former translation was completed by the journalist Lauw Giok Lan.
On the night of 2 May 1912 Lie caught ill, and two days later his doctor diagnosed him with typhus. Forbidden from leaving the house, Lie's condition steadily declined. He died on 6 May 1912 and was buried in Kota Bambu, Batavia, while THHK schools throughout the city flew their flags at half-mast. Lie was survived by his wife and four children: Soan Nio (born 1892), Hong Nio (born 1896), Kok Hian (born 1898), and Kok Hoei (born 1901). Tan Sioe Nio died the following year.
Legacy
During his early life Lie was known as a good student and, later, a good teacher. By the age of twenty he had a considerable command of Sundanese and Malay; he also spoke fair Dutch, a rarity for ethnic Chinese at the time. In his journalism career Lie attempted to avoid the yellow press tactics used by his contemporaries and preferred to avoid extensive polemics in the press. Malaysian journalism historian Ahmat Adam, writing in 1995, notes that Lie's entry into the press sparked an increase in Chinese presence in the Dutch East Indies, and Soemardjo suggests that Lie remained best known to native Indonesians through his work in the press.
From a linguist's perspective, Kasijanto Sastrodinomo of the University of Indonesia describes Malajoe Batawi as &quot;extraordinary&quot;, noting that the first Malay-language textbook was written by a non-Malay. He also emphsises that the book did not use any English-derived linguistics terms which were omnipresent in 20th century Indonesian textbooks. Linguist Waruno Mahdi writes that Lie's dictionary was the &quot;most remarkable achievement of Chinese Malay writing&quot; from a linguist's point of view. In his doctoral dissertation, Benitez suggests that Lie may have hoped for bazaar Malay to become a lingua franca in the Dutch East Indies. Adam found Lie's works to have left &quot;an indelible mark on the development of modern Indonesian language&quot;.
 Adam suggests that Lie is best remembered for his contributions to Indonesian literature. Lie's works of fiction were well received by his contemporaries. Tio writes that &quot;old and young intimately read his (Lie's) writings, which were praised for their simple language, rythym, clarity, freshness, and strength. The skill and accuracy with which he chose his words, the neatness and orderliness with which he arranged his sentences. ... People said that he was ahead of his time. He was likened to a large shining star, a stark contrast to the small, faded stars in the dark sky.&quot; Further praise was awarded by other contemporaries, both native and Chinese, such as Ibrahim gelar Marah Soetan and Agus Salim. When ethnic Chinese writers became common in the early 1900s, critics named Lie the &quot;father of Chinese Malay literature&quot; for his contributions, including Siti Akbari and Tjhit Liap Seng.
Several of Lie's books, including Sair Tjerita Siti Akbari, Kitab Edja, Orang Prampoewan, and Sobat Anak-anak, saw multiple printings. Tio does not record any after the 1920s. In 2000 Kitab Edja was reprinted in the inaugural volume of Kesastraan Melayu Tionghoa dan Kebangsaan Indonesia, an anthology of Chinese Malay literature. His Sair Tjerita Siti Akbari, which he considered one of his best works, was adapted for the stage several times. Lie used a simplified version to lead a troupe of teenaged actors, which saw some success in West Java. In 1922 the Sukabumi branch of the Shiong Tih Hui published another stage adaptation under the title Pembalesan Siti Akbari (Revenge of Siti Akbari), which was being performed by Miss Riboet's Orion by 1926; this stageplay was reprinted by the Lontar Foundation in 2006 using the Perfected Spelling System. In 1940 the Wong brothers directed a film entitled Siti Akbari, starring Roekiah and Rd. Mochtar; the film was purportedly based on Lie's poem, although the extent of the influence is uncertain.
After the rise of the nationalist movement and the Dutch colonial government's efforts to use Balai Pustaka to publish literary works for native consumption, Lie's work began to be marginalised. The Dutch colonial government used Court Malay as a language of administration, a language for everyday dealings which was taught in schools. The Indonesian nationalists appropriated the language to help build a national culture, promoted through the press and literature. Chinese Malay literature, written in &quot;low&quot; Malay, was declared steadily marginalised. Tio, writing in 1958, found that the younger generation were not learning about Lie and his works.
Controversy
In a 1923 article for the Chinese-owned newspaper Lay Po, Tio revealed that Sair Tjerita Siti Akbari had been heavily influenced by the 1847 poem Sjair Abdoel Moeloek, credited variously to Raja Ali Haji or his sister Saleha. He noted that Sair Siti Akbari, which Lie stated to be his own, closely followed the earlier work's plot. In his 1958 biography of Lie, Tio revealed that Lie's Tjhit Liap Seng was an amalgamation of two European works: Jacob van Lennep's Klaasje Zevenster (1865) and Jules Verne's Les Tribulations d'un Chinois en Chine (Tribulations of a Chinaman in China; 1879). Tio noted a third work, Pembalasan dendam Hati, had extensive parallels with a work by Xavier de Mont&lt;U+00E9&gt;pin translated as De Wraak van de Koddebeier (The Gamekeeper's Revenge). In face of these revelations, literary critics such as Tan Soey Bing and Tan Oen Tjeng wrote that none of Lie's works were original.
This conclusion has been extensively challenged by writers who have shown original elements in Lie's work. Tio noted that in translating Kapitein Flamberge Lie had changed the ending; the main character no longer died in an explosion of dynamite, but survived to marry his love interest Hermine de Morlay. In exploring the similarities between Sjair Abdoel Moeloek and Siti Akbari, Zaini-Lajoubert noted that the main plot elements in both stories are the same, although some elements are present in one story and not the other &lt;U+2013&gt; or given more detail. She found that the two differed greatly in their styles, especially Lie's emphasis on description and realism. Salmon found that Tjhit Liap Seng{{'s}} general plot mostly followed that of Klaasje Zevenster, with some sections which seemed to be direct translations. However, she found that Lie also added, subtracted, and modified contents; she noted Lie's more sparse approach to description and the introduction of a new character, Thio Tian, who had lived in Java. The Indonesian literary critic Jakob Soemardjo summarised that Lie &quot;may be said to have been original in his style, but not in his material&quot;.
Bibliography
  According to Tio, Lie published 25 books and pamphlets; entries here are derived from his list. Salmon writes that some, such as Lok Bouw Tan, may no longer be extant. Lie also wrote some short stories, which are not listed here.
Poetry

(200 pages in 2 volumes)
(4 pages in 1 volume)

Fiction

(40 pages in 1 volume)
(500 pages in 8 volumes)
(300 pages in 4 volumes)
(300 pages in 4 volumes)
(350 pages in 5 volumes)
(80 pages in 1 volume)
(239 pages in 3 volumes)

Non-fiction

(38 pages in 1 volume)
(116 pages in 1 volume)
(with W. Meulenhoff; 16 pages in 1 volume)

(92 pages in 1 volume)


Translation

(at least nights 41 to 94)
(with F. Wiggers; at least 10 of the 25 volumes published)
(560 pages in 7 volumes)
(560 pages in 7 volumes)
(800 pages in 10 volumes)
(960 pages in 12 volumes)
(960 pages in 12 volumes; posthumous)
(1250 pages in 16 volumes; posthumous)
(with Lauw Giok Lan; 960 pages in 12 volumes; posthumous)
(240 pages in 3 volumes; posthumous)

Notes


References
Footnotes 
Works cited 





























Category:1853 births Category:1912 deaths Category:People from Bogor Category:Indonesian people of Chinese descent
