 &quot;The Queen of Hearts&quot; is part of a set of playing card based poems by an anonymous author, originally published with three lesser-known poems, &quot;The King of Spades&quot;, &quot;The King of Clubs&quot;, and &quot;The Diamond King&quot;, in the British publication The European Magazine, no. 434, in April 1782.1
Synopsis and structure
&quot;The Queen of Hearts&quot; relates how the Queen of Hearts bakes some tarts which the Knave of Hearts steals. The King of Hearts has the Knave punished, so he brings them back and pledges not to steal again.


The queen of hearts

She made some tarts,

All on a summer's day

The knave of Hearts

He stole those tarts

And with them ran away:

The king of hearts

Call'd for those tarts,

And beat the knave full sore;

The knave of hearts

Brought back those tarts

And said he'll ne'er steal more.


 The other poems published with it deal with nothing besides the domestic arrangements of the other three suits: &quot;The King of Spades&quot; flirts with the maids, so the Queen of Spades has them beaten and drives them out. She relents when the Knave appeals to her on their behalf. &quot;The King of Clubs&quot; and his wife constantly fight, but the Knave keeps aloof, and seeks to make peace between the two. The author opines that royalty who fight like that should be punished. &quot;The Diamond King&quot; and his wife would get along perfectly, except the Knave seeks to cause problems between them. The author encourages the King to have the Knave killed.2
&quot;The Queen of Hearts&quot; proved by far the most popular of the poems, and entered popular culture, while the others fell into obscurity.3 Although it was originally published in a magazine for adults,4 it eventually became best known as a nursery rhyme. By 1785, it had been set to music.5
Inspiration for characters
 There has been speculation about a model for the Queen of Hearts. In The Real Personage of Mother Goose, Katherine Elwes Thomas claims the Queen of Hearts was based on Elizabeth of Bohemia. Benham, in his book Playing Cards: History of the Pack and Explanations of its Many Secrets, notes that French playing cards from the mid-17th century have Judith from the Hebrew Bible as the Queen of Hearts.6 However, according to W. Gurney Benham, a scholar who researched the history of playing cards: &quot;The old nursery rhyme about the Knave of Hearts who stole the tarts and was beaten for so doing by the King, seems to be founded on nothing more than the fact that 'hearts' rhymes with 'tarts'.&quot;7
Adaptations
The poem's story is retold in a much expanded form in an 1805 poem known as King and Queen of Hearts: with the Rogueries of the Knave who stole the Queen's Pies8 by Charles Lamb, which gives each line of the original, followed by a poem commenting on the line.9 In 1844 Halliwell included the poem in the 3rd Edition of his The Nursery Rhymes of England (though he dropped it from later editions) and Caldecott made it the subject of one of his 1881 &quot;Picture Books&quot;, a series of illustrated nursery rhymes which he normally issued in pairs before Christmas from 1878 until his death in 1886.10
&quot;The Queen of Hearts&quot; is quoted in and forms the basis of the plot of Lewis Carroll's Alice in Wonderland, Chapter XI: &quot;Who Stole the Tarts?&quot;,11 a chapter that lampoons the British legal system through means of the trial of the Knave of Hearts,12 where the rhyme is presented as evidence. The poem became more popular after its inclusion in Carroll's work.13
References


Bibliography








Category:Nursery rhymes Category:English poems Category:Children's poetry



Reichertz (2000), p. 93↩
Reichertz (2000), pp. 93&lt;U+2013&gt;95↩




, quoting W. Gurney Benham (1959), Playing Cards: History of the Pack and Explanations of its Many Secrets↩
↩
Lamb (1805)↩

Carroll (1865)↩
Fordyce (1994), p. 134↩



