


This article is about the metro system in Hong Kong. For the company that operates the system, see MTR Corporation. For other meanings of the TLA &quot;MTR&quot;, see MTR (disambiguation).



Mass Transit Railway or MTR (&lt;U+5730&gt;&lt;U+4E0B&gt;&lt;U+9435&gt;&lt;U+8DEF&gt;, literally &quot;underground railway&quot;; usually abbreviated to &lt;U+5730&gt;&lt;U+9435&gt; or &lt;U+5730&gt;&lt;U+4E0B&gt;&lt;U+9435&gt;) is the main rapid transit railway system in Hong Kong. Since the MTR service first opened in 1979, the network has expanded to encompass seven lines and 53 stations along 91.0 km 1. Constructed and operated by MTR Corporation Limited, the MTR system is a very popular mode of public transport in Hong Kong, with an average of 2.46 million2 journeys recorded each day.
Much of this popularity is due to the efficiency and affordability of the MTR. For example, a taxi ride from Tsing Yi in the New Territories to Causeway Bay on Hong Kong Island costs around HK$200, while the same trip on the MTR costs HK$11.80, and HK$5.70 on concessionary fare.3 The integration of the Octopus contactless smart card system into the MTR system in September 1997 has particularly enhanced the ease of use of the MTR.
Construction of the MTR was prompted by a government-commissioned study released in 1967. The Hong Kong Government commissioned the study in the 1960s to find solutions to the growing traffic problem caused by expansion of the colony's economy.4 Construction started soon after release of the study, and the first line was opened in 1979. The MTR was immediately popular with the residents of Hong Kong, and as a result subsequent lines have been built to cover more territory. There are continuing debates as to how and where to expand the MTR network, including new lines and a possible merger with Kowloon-Canton Railway Corporation to create a combined network.
The MTR network

Current system map of the MTR. For the bilingual version of the MTR map, click here.



Between Yau Ma Tei and Tiu Keng Leng (15 stations)


Between Tsuen Wan and Central (16 stations)


Between Sheung Wan and Chai Wan (14 stations)


Between Tung Chung and Hong Kong (8 stations)


Between AsiaWorld-Expo and Hong Kong (5 stations)


Between Po Lam and North Point (7 stations)


Between Sunny Bay and Disneyland Resort (2 stations)


{{-}}
History of the MTR
      
Initial proposal
During the 1960s, the government of Hong Kong saw a need to accommodate increasing road traffic predicted for the future as Hong Kong's economy continued to grow strongly. British transport consultants Freeman, Fox, Wilbur Smith &amp; Associates were appointed to study the transport system of Hong Kong. The consultants released the Hong Kong Mass Transport Study in September 1967, which proposed the construction of a mass transport underground railway system in Hong Kong.5
In 1970, an underground network with four lines was laid out and planned as part of the British consultants' new report, Hong Kong Mass Transit: Further Studies. The four lines were to be the Kwun Tong Line, Tsuen Wan Line, Island Line, and East Kowloon Line.6 However, the lines that were eventually constructed were somewhat different compared with the lines that were originally proposed by the &quot;Hong Kong Mass Transport Study&quot;.
In 1972, the Hong Kong government authorised construction of the Initial System, a 20-kilometre system that roughly translates to the Kwun Tong Line today (except the line now extends to Tiu Keng Leng). Negotiations with four major construction consortia started in 1973. The government's intention was to tender the entire project, based on the British design, as a single tender at a fixed price. A consortium from Japan signed an agreement to construct the system in early 1974, but in December of the same year it pulled out from the agreement, stemming from fears of the Arab oil crisis.7
Modified Initial System (Kwun Tong Line / Tsuen Wan Line)
Several weeks later, in early 1975, a government agency known as the Mass Transport Provisional Authority was established to take charge of the project. It announced that the Initial System would be slightly reduced to 15.6 kilometres, and renamed it the Modified Initial System. Plans for a single contract were also abandoned in favour of 25 engineering contracts and 10 electrical and mechanical contracts.
In addition, the government-owned Hong Kong Mass Transit Railway Corporation (MTRC) was established to replace the Mass Transport Provisional Authority. (This was the company succeeded by the MTR Corporation Limited on 30 June 2000)
Construction of the Modified Initial System (now part of Kwun Tong Line and Tsuen Wan Line) commenced in November 1975. After almost four years, the northern section was completed on 30 September 1979. On 1 October 1979, the northern section was opened, with trains running from Shek Kip Mei to Kwun Tong. The route from Tsim Sha Tsui to Shek Kip Mei was opened in December of the same year.8
In 1980, the first harbour crossing was made by an MTR train as the Kwun Tong Line was extended even further to Chater station, now known as Central station. To deal with increasing patronage, trains were also extended to six cars.
Tsuen Wan Line
The government approved construction of the  in 1977, then known as Tsuen Wan Extension, and works commenced in November 1978. The project added a 10.5-kilometre section to the MTR system, from Prince Edward to Tsuen Wan. The line started service on 10 May 19829 with a total cost of construction (not adjusted for inflation) at HK$4.1 billion.
When service of this line started, the section of the Kwun Tong Line from Chater to Argyle, present-day Mong Kok station, was transferred to the Tsuen Wan Line. Thus, Waterloo became the terminus of the Kwun Tong Line, and both Argyle and Prince Edward stations became interchange stations. This change was made because system planners expected traffic of the Tsuen Wan Line would exceed that of the Kwun Tong Line. This forecast proved quite accurate, necessitating a bypass from the northwestern New Territories to Hong Kong Island. Launched in 1998, the Tung Chung Line serves exactly that purpose.10
Although land acquisitions were made for a station at Tsuen Wan West, the station was never built. This is not to be confused with Tsuen Wan West Station on KCR West Rail, which lies on the newly reclaimed area near the former ferry pier.
It is interesting to note that since the line's opening in 1982, this is the only line whose alignment has virtually remained the same for the past 23 years. For example, the Kwun Tong Line's alignment has changed for 2 times since its opening - the taking over of Tsuen Wan Line from Mong Kok to Central, and the taking over of Eastern Harbour Crossing section by the Tseung Kwan O Line.
Island Line
Government approvals were granted for construction of the  in December, 1980. Construction commenced in October, 1981. On 31 May 1985 the Island Line was opened with service between Admiralty and Chai Wan stations. Both Admiralty and Central stations became interchange stations with the Tsuen Wan Line. Furthermore, each train was extended to eight cars.11
On 23 May 1986, service reached Sheung Wan station. Construction for this station was delayed for one year as government offices which sat on top of the station had to be removed to a new location before construction could start.
Eastern Harbour Crossing extension
In 1984, the government approved the construction of the Eastern Harbour Crossing, a tunnel to be used by cars and MTR trains. The Kwun Tong Line was extended across the harbour to Quarry Bay, which became an interchange station for the Kwun Tong Line and the Island Line. The extension was launched on 5 August 1989. An intermediate station, Lam Tin, started operations on 1 October 1989.12
Airport Express and Tung Chung Line
The decision was made in October 1989 to construct a new international airport at Chek Lap Kok on Lantau Island to replace the overcrowded Kai Tak International Airport.13 The government invited the MTR to build a train line, then known as the Lantau Airport Railway, to the airport. But construction did not begin until the Chinese and British governments settled their financial and land disagreements in November 1994.
In the end, the new line was included in the financing plans of the new Hong Kong International Airport as the airport was not considered viable without direct public transport links. Construction costs were also shared by the MTR which was granted many large-scale developments in the construction plans for the new stations.
The Lantau Airport Railway turned into two MTR lines, the Tung Chung Line and the Airport Express. The  was officially opened on 21 June 1998 by Hong Kong Chief Executive Tung Chee Hwa, and service commenced the next day. The  opened for service on 6 July 1998 along with the new Hong Kong International Airport.14
The Airport Express line is the second most popular means of transport to the Hong Kong International Airport. In 2005, 22% of the commuters took the Airport Express to and from the airport. 15
Quarry Bay Congestion Relief Works
The Quarry Bay Congestion Relief Works involved extending the Hong Kong Island end of the Kwun Tong Line from Quarry Bay to North Point via a 4.2 kilometre tunnel. The project was initiated due to overcrowding at Quarry Bay and persistent passenger complaints about the 5-minute walk from the Island Line station to the Kwun Tong Line station. Construction began in September 1997 and was completed in September 2001 at a cost of HK$3.0 billion.16
Tseung Kwan O Line
Construction of the  was approved on 18 August 1998 to serve new housing developments. Construction began on 24 April 1999 and the line officially opened in 2002. It took over the train tracks running through the Eastern Harbour Tunnel from the Kwun Tong Line, and ran from Po Lam to North Point. When the line was opened, the Kwun Tong Line was diverted to Tiu Keng Leng on the new line. The Government paid part of the cost for this construction, and the money came also from private developers which linked construction of the Tseung Kwan O Line to new real estate and commercial developments. Previously under-developed areas were opened up for development with more transport options.17
West Rail Interface Works
While the construction of the Tung Chung Line was still underway, the plan for building a railway corridor to serve the northwestern New Territories was conceived. Space has been reserved for the addition of an interchange station and two extra tracks (to allow non-stop service for the Airport Express) between Olympic and Lai King. Originally known as the Airport Railway Phase 2, the contracts of the West Rail Interface Works were awarded shortly after construction works of the West Rail commenced. The project comprised Mei Foo Interchange (modification of the existing Mei Foo station on the Tsuen Wan Line to provide a pedestrian link to the West Rail Mei Foo station; Nam Cheong Station (an interchange station on the Tung Chung Line, jointly operated by the MTRC and KCRC) and 4-Tracking Works (the additional two tracks, 4 km in length, allow the Tung Chung Line trains to stop at Nam Cheong without obstructing the passage of Airport Express trains).18
The Works were completed in stages. The Tung Chung Line trains have been running on the new track since mid May 2003, whereas the Mei Foo station interchange subway and the Nam Cheong station were opened at the same time the West Rail opened for public use in December 2003.
East Rail Interface Works
Two major works have been undergone to improve interchange between MTR and KCR East Rail. The modification of Kowloon Tong station started in June 2001. A new pedestrian link to East Rail Kowloon Tong station southern concourse and a new entrance has been completed in June 2003 to cope with the increase in interchange passenger flow.19
Modification to MTR Tsim Sha Tsui Station involved in upgrading station factilities and concourse layout to facilitate access from the pedestrian links of East Rail East Tsim Sha Tsui station. New entrances to the subway links were opened on 19 September 2004 (for KCR Mody Road subway) and 30 March 2005 (for Nathan Road subway, which connects to KCR Middle Road subway), with the whole scheme completed in May 2005.
Disneyland Resort Line and AsiaWorld-Expo Extension

, previously known as Penny's Bay Rail Link, provides service to the Hong Kong Disneyland Resort which was opened on 12 September 2005. Service to Sunny Bay station on the Tung Chung Line started on 1 June 2005. The new line and Disneyland Resort station opened for service on 1 August 2005.
This 3.5 km single-track railway is an extension of the Tung Chung Line. It runs between Sunny Bay station to Disneyland Resort station, which is designed to blend in with the Hong Kong Disneyland to create a resort ambience. The line currently operates two four-car fully-automated trains (each car accommodating up to 180 passengers) running every four to ten minutes. These carriages were converted from the existing rolling stock to suit the recreational and adventurous nature of the 3.5 minute journey.20
The new AsiaWorld-Expo station is an extension of the Airport Express to serve the new international exhibition centre, known as the AsiaWorld-Expo at Hong Kong International Airport. The station opened on 20 December 2005 to meet the opening of the exhibition centre. To cope with the projected increase in patronage, Airport Express trains has expanded from 7 cars to 8 cars. Additional trains will also be deployed on the Tung Chung line during major exhibitions and events.21
MTR Corporation Limited
 
On 5 October 2000 the operator of the MTR network, MTR Corporation Limited, became Hong Kong's first privatised rail and metro company, which marked the start of the Hong Kong government's planned initiative to wind down its interests in various public utilities. Prior to its listing on the Hong Kong Stock Exchange, the Mass Transit Railway Coporation was wholly owned by the Hong Kong Government. The offering involved the sale of around one billion shares, and the company now has the largest shareholder base of any company listed in Hong Kong. In June, 2001, MTR Corporation Limited was transferred to Hang Seng Index.
MTR Corporation Limited has always been reliant on developing properties next to railway stations for its profits (although the rail lines are profitable themselves); many recently built stations are incorporated into large housing estates or shopping complexes. Examples of this type of construction can be seen at Tsing Yi station, which is built next to the Maritime Square shopping centre, and directly underneath the Tierra Verde housing estate.
On April 11, 2006, MTR Corporation Limited signed a non-binding Memorandum of Understanding with the Hong Kong Government, the owner of Kowloon-Canton Railway Corporation (KCRC), to merge the operation of the two railway networks of Hong Kong. If evenutally approved, MTR Corporation Limited will take over the operation of the KCR network and combine the fare system of the two networks.2223
Safety on the MTR

Platform screen doors on the  at Tiu Keng Leng.

Various campaigns and activities are taken to help ensure that the MTR is a safe system to travel on. Poster campaigns displaying information on topics such as escalator safety are a common sight in all MTR stations, and announcements are made regularly as safety reminders to travelling passengers.
Bylaws have been recently introduced to deter potentially dangerous actions on the MTR, such as the ban of flammable goods on the MTR and rushing into trains when the doors are closing. Penalties ranging from fines to imprisonment have been imposed for such offenses.24 Metallic balloons are also banned due to previous incidents on KCR and on MTR's Island Line where a metallic balloon interfered with the operation of the overhead power lines.
Police officers patrol on trains and stations, and police posts are available at some stations. The Hong Kong Police Force has a Railway District responsible for the MTR and the KCR. Closed-circuit television cameras are installed in stations.25
Tung Chung Line, the Airport Express and Tseung Kwan O Line, except Quarry Bay station, had platform screen doors (PSDs) installed upon construction. These doors prevent people from falling onto the rails, and MTRC allowed the assumption that this implementation was primarily a safety campaign, without heavily promoting it directly. In fact, the primary motivation was to separate the stations from the tunnels, hence allowing substantial energy savings on station air-conditioning and tunnel ventilation.26 Automatic platform gates (APGs) have also been installed at the Sunny Bay and Disneyland Resort stations. Their heights are half of the PSDs and only prevent people from falling onto the rails.
In June 2000, The MTR Corporation proceeded with its plans to retrofit 2,960 pairs of platform screen doors at all 30 underground stations on the Kwun Tong Line, Tsuen Wan Line, and Island Line in a six year programme. The programme made MTR the world's first railway to undertake the retrofitting of PSDs on a passenger-carrying system already in operation. A prototype design was first introduced at Choi Hung station in the 3rd quarter of 2001. HK$0.10 per passenger trip was levied on Octopus card users to help fund the HK$2 billion retrofit programme. The whole installation scheme was completed in October 2005. The original completion year was 2006. The MTR Corporation said that part of the cost had to be assumed by passengers.27
Station facilities, amenities and services
 thumb|250px|the multiple cross-platform-interchange system between Tiu Keng Leng station and Yau Tong station  
With the high level of daily passenger traffic, facilities of MTR stations are built with durability and accessibility in mind. The elevators and escalators in stations are heavy duty, with the elevators installed by Otis Elevator Company/Fujitec and the escalators installed by Constructions Industrielles de la Mediterran&lt;U+00E9&gt;e and Otis Elevator Company.
After extensive retrofits, the MTR system has become, in general, disabled-friendly — the trains have dedicated wheelchair space, the stations have special floor tiles to guide the blind safely on the platforms, and there are extra wide entry and exit gates for wheelchairs as well.
Unlike many other metro systems around the world, &quot;main line&quot; MTR stations do not have toilet facilities, although their installation has been contemplated. Only stations on the Airport Express and Disneyland Resort Line have access to toilet facilities.
Interchange stations
The MTR network is unique in its arrangement of interchange stations. Interchange stations between the Island, Tsuen Wan, Kwun Tong and Tseung Kwan O lines are arranged in pairs; such an arrangement allows cross-platform interchange wherein a passenger leaves a train on one side of the platform and boards trains on the other side of the platform for another line.
Most of those stations make use of a cross-platform interchange system, where the commuter can change to another line on the opposite platform. For example, when a person is travelling on the Kwun Tong Line towards Tiu Keng Leng, getting off at Yau Tong would allow him to change trains across the platfrom for the Tseung Kwan O Line towards North Point. Whereas, staying on the train and reaching Tiu Keng Leng would allow you to change trains for the Tseung Kwan O Line towards Po Lam.
This not only makes it more convenient for passengers, it also reduces the amount of traffic per station. Riders are made aware of the closest connection point by way of in-train visual and auditory messages. Although riders can disregard these tips, the design of the stations are for the convenience of passengers.
Telecommunications network coverage
A full GSM (GSM-900 and GSM-1800), CDMA and TDMA mobile phone network is in place through out the MTR system of stations and tunnels. Passengers can stay connected underground.
Currently, full 3G network coverage in all stations and tunnels for the MTR system has been provided by 3 Hong Kong, SmarTone-Vodafone and PCCW Mobile. Passengers with subscription services will be able to make video calls and access high speed video content on their mobile phones regardless whether the train is above ground or under ground.28
Shops and other services
Until recently, MTR stations only had branches of the Hang Seng Bank and Maxim's Cakes stores, owned by Jardine Matheson, and a handful of other shops. Since the privatisation of the MTR, however, numerous shops have been added to certain stations, turning them into miniature shopping centres. Services available at most stations include:

Hang Seng Bank branches and ATMs
Bank of China ATMs
7-Eleven or Circle K convenience stores

Apart from retailers, there are also dentists and medical clinics, drycleaners, and florists along the Tseung Kwan O Line. Standard services include payphones, vending machines (Coca-Cola only), and self-service photo-booths.
Free magazines and newspapers
Recruit was the first free magazine which was solely distributed in MTR stations since July 1992. However, in July 2002, the contract between the magazine and MTR was terminated. Another recruitment magazine Jiu Jik (&lt;U+62DB&gt;&lt;U+8077&gt;), published by South China Morning Post, replaced Recruit as the only free recruitment magazine distributed in MTR stations on every Tuesdays and Fridays.
At the same time, there was another entertainment magazine Hui Kai Guide (&lt;U+53BB&gt;&lt;U+8857&gt; Guide). However, it is no longer distributed in MTR stations since 2006.
The Metropolis Daily (&lt;U+90FD&gt;&lt;U+5E02&gt;&lt;U+65E5&gt;&lt;U+5831&gt;), published by Metro International, is the first free newspaper distributed free in MTR stations from Monday to Friday (except public holidays); and in 2005, there is another weekend newspaper Express Post (&lt;U+5FEB&gt;&lt;U+7DDA&gt;&lt;U+5468&gt;&lt;U+5831&gt;), distributed every Saturday except public holidays.
The Metropop (&lt;U+90FD&gt;&lt;U+5E02&gt;&lt;U+6D41&gt;&lt;U+884C&gt;), also published by Metro International, started its distribution in MTR stations every Thursdays since April 27 2006, few months after the termination of Hui Kai Guide. It is a weekly magazine featuring cultural affairs and city trends.
Extra services for Airport Express

The Airport Express also offer value-added services to travellers on the line. Toilets and check-in facilities are available at every station on the line. A free Airport Express shuttle bus service transports travellers from stations to their respective hotels as well. Flight passengers can even have in-town check-in at the station, which offers a more convenient and time-saving routine.29
Fares and tickets
As of January 2005, there are two different fare classes on the MTR: Adult and concessionary. Only children below the age of 12, senior citizens 65 years or older, or full-time Hong Kong students between the ages of 12 and 25 qualify for the concessionary rate. Children below the age of 3 travel free.
Similar to some other metro systems in the world, the fare payable by a passenger depends on the approximate distance travelled. However, taking any particular station as the origin, the other stations fall into fare &quot;zones&quot; depending on the distance from the origin. The fare to all stations in a &quot;zone&quot; is the same and increases with distance, especially if the journey involves a harbour crossing. Adult fares range from HK$3.80 to $26.00. Concessionary fares are usually half the adult fare, and range from HK$2.40 to $13.00. Fares for the Airport Express Line are significantly higher.
Octopus cards
 
The Octopus card is a rechargeable contactless smart card used in an electronic payment system in Hong Kong. It was launched in September 1997 for use on both the MTR and the KCR and now is the most widely used electronic cash system for transactions in Hong Kong as many retailers are fitted with readers.30
The Octopus card uses radio frequency identification (RFID) technology so that users need only hold the card in front of the reader. Physical contact is not required, and the card need not even be taken out because the reader can penetrate through material. This fare collection system has been so popular that many cities such as Singapore, London, Chicago, and Taipei have adopted the idea, launching their own version of smart cards, respectively named EZ-link, Oyster card, and EasyCard.
Except for the Airport Express, MTR fares are slightly lower when using an Octopus card compared to using single journey tickets. For example, the cost of the 3-minute journey from Admiralty to Tsim Sha Tsui across the Victoria Harbour is (as of 2005) HK$7.9 using the Octopus card, compared with HK$9.0 for a single-journey ticket.31
Tourist pass

A special single journey ticket (magnetic farecard) for the , released in late 2004.

Two types of tourist passes are available: one allows unlimited rides for a single day (at HK$50), while the other allows three days of unlimited rides on the MTR, with a stored value of HK$20, refundable deposit of HK$50 and choice of either a single (HK$220) or return (HK$300) trip on the Airport Express.
Tourists are required to produce proof of tourist status, (e.g. passports or, in the case of Mainland travellers, entry permits) when purchasing the pass, and whenever requested by a ticket inspector during spot-checks.32
Other fares
The magnetic fare card system is used for single journey tickets. These tickets are pre-paid for between pre-determined stations, and are good for only one trip. There are no return tickets, except on the Airport Express.
Fares for the Airport Express are substantially different from main line fares. Apart from single tickets, same-day return tickets (same price as a single), and one-month return tickets are also available.
A one-day pass can be used to unlimited travel to/from Hong Kong Disneyland within the same day, and costs HK$50. This pass can be purchased from any MTR Customer Service Centres or Airport Express Customer Service Centres.33
MTR rolling stock
  
Four variations of rolling stock operate on the MTR on 1.5kV DC overhead electrification. All trains are electric multiple units (EMUs), equipped with ATC and ATP, operating on 1432 mm rail gauge. Except for the rolling stock of the Airport Express, all trains are designed with features to cope with high density passenger traffic on stopping services. Examples are the latitudinal seating arrangement, additional ventilation fans and 5 doors on each side per car.
The Tung Chung Line and the Airport Express use dedicated rolling stock designs specified to their respective lines. Initially run in 7-car formations, they have now been lengthened to eight cars. These two variations are built jointly by Adtranz (now Bombardier Transportations) and Construcciones y Auxiliar de Ferrocarriles between 1994&lt;U+2013&gt;97. 34
The other lines are operated using a mixture of the other two variations, known as the &quot;M-Train&quot; and the &quot;K-Stock&quot;. The &quot;M-Stock&quot; (or CM-Stock&quot;) of &quot;M-Train&quot; are the oldest trains on the MTR, built originally by Metro Cammell (now Alstom)35 and refurbished by United Goninan36. The &quot;M-Train&quot; is the only variation that uses sliding doors, as opposed to others which use plug-doors. The &quot;K-Stock&quot; are built jointly by Mitsubishi Heavy Industries and ROTEM37, and a further order of 32 cars is due to be in service on the Tung Chung Line by 2007.3839
The Disneyland Resort Line uses driverless &quot;M-Trains&quot; with their appearance overhauled to suit the atmosphere and theme of the line.40 Windows on each carriage and the handrails inside are made into the shape of Mickey Mouse's head, and there are bronze-made Disney characters decorating the interior of the carriages.
Depots
Depots are located at Kowloon Bay (for Kwun Tong Line), Tsuen Wan (for Tsuen Wan Line), Heng Fa Chuen (for Island Line), and Dream City (for Tseung Kwan O Line). Tung Chung Line, Airport Express, and Disneyland Resort Line trains are serviced at Siu Ho Wan between Tung Chung and Sunny Bay.
Art promotion
 
With the objective &quot;not only bring MTR passengers more time for life, but also more time for art&quot;, the &quot;Art in MTR&quot; Initiative has been a success since its reception in 1998, where the Airport Express Artwork Programme was the pioneer project. Thereafter, live performances, art exhibitions, display of artwork by established and emerging artists, students and young children have been brought into the MTR stations. MTR Corporation Limited have even made art part of the station architecture when building new stations or renovating existing ones. Artworks are exhibited in different forms on the network, including &quot;arttube&quot;, open art gallery, community art galleries, roving art, living art, and art in station architecture.41
By incorporating elements of art into the railway network, the travelling environment for the passengers is not only enhanced, but also makes their journeys even more pleasant and enjoyable. Moreover, with MTR stations being an integral part of the neighbourhood, the programme also provides opportunities to promote Hong Kong's community art, encourage art appreciation among the public and give residents a feeling of home at the stations.
The future


Main articles: Future of the MTR, West Island Line and South Island Line, Sha Tin to Central Link


 Several future projects on the MTR have been put forward by MTR Corporation Limited to the Hong Kong Government, with some already under under construction. The network is also set to be significantly expanded with the merger of MTR Corporation Limited with the government-owned Kowloon-Canton Railway Corporation (KCRC), with the non-binding Memorandum of Understanding signed on 11 April 2006 to grant MTR Corporation operation of the existing KCR network with a service concession of 50 years. The new Sha Tin to Central Link that was originally awarded to KCRC would now also be operated by MTR Corporation Limited, which will run from Tai Wai Station in Tai Wai to Central.4243
Provisions are made to upgrade the existing infrastructure of the MTR. Airport Station on the Airport Express will have a new platform to serve departure passengers for Hong Kong International Airport's Skyplaza. New subway links to the stations are also being made for better access, and an extension for the Tseung Kwan O Line to create a branch line to Tseung Kwan O South has been gazetted. A further proposal to extend the existing Kwun Tong Line to Whampoa Garden, together in a tie-up with the Sha Tin to Central Link expansion have been made in April 2006.44
The West Island Line and South Island Line, first put forward to the government by MTR Corporation Limited on 21 January 2003, only received approval on 30 June 2005 after its heavily-modified fourth proposal. This consisted of West Island Line extending the Island Line to Kennedy Town, South Island Line (East section) from Admiralty to Ap Lei Chau and South Island Line (West section) that connects the previous two lines. Consultation is underway and the whole extension should be completed and operational by 2012.45
See also


KCR
Transport in Hong Kong
MTR Corporation Limited
Trains on the MTR
Future of the MTR
List of MTR stations
List of metro systems worldwide

References




External links
MTR service

MTR Corporation Limited
Map of the Hong Kong MTR
Journey time and Fare Information

Related products

Information on Octopus Cards



de:Mass Transit Railway es:MTR fi:Hongkongin metro fr:M&lt;U+00E9&gt;tro de Hong Kong id:MTR it:Metropolitana di Hong Kong ja:&lt;U+9999&gt;&lt;U+6E2F&gt;MTR ko:&lt;U+D64D&gt;&lt;U+CF69&gt; &lt;U+C9C0&gt;&lt;U+D558&gt;&lt;U+CCA0&gt; nl:Metro van Hongkong ru:&lt;U+0413&gt;&lt;U+043E&gt;&lt;U+043D&gt;&lt;U+043A&gt;&lt;U+043E&gt;&lt;U+043D&gt;&lt;U+0433&gt;&lt;U+0441&gt;&lt;U+043A&gt;&lt;U+0438&gt;&lt;U+0439&gt; &lt;U+043C&gt;&lt;U+0435&gt;&lt;U+0442&gt;&lt;U+0440&gt;&lt;U+043E&gt;&lt;U+043F&gt;&lt;U+043E&gt;&lt;U+043B&gt;&lt;U+0438&gt;&lt;U+0442&gt;&lt;U+0435&gt;&lt;U+043D&gt; zh-yue:&lt;U+9999&gt;&lt;U+6E2F&gt;&lt;U+5730&gt;&lt;U+9435&gt; zh:&lt;U+9999&gt;&lt;U+6E2F&gt;&lt;U+5730&gt;&lt;U+9435&gt;
Category: Subways



&quot;Mass Transit Railway&quot;, Transport Department (Hong Kong Government), retrieved 16 March 2006↩
&quot;MTR Patronage Figures for February 2006&quot;, MTR Corporation Limited, retrieved 16 March 2006↩
Based on &quot;MTR Journey Planner&quot;, MTR Corporation Limited, retrieved 16 March 2006.↩
Freeman, Fox, Wilbur Smith &amp; Associates (1967), Hong Kong Mass Transport Study, as shown in map above mentioned.↩

Freeman, Fox, Wilbur Smith &amp; Associates (1970), Hong Kong Mass Transport Further Study.↩
&quot;The History&quot;, Hong Kong Mass Transit InfoCenter, retrieved 19 March 2006↩





&quot;The Airport Railway Project&quot;, Heavy Iron Station, retrieved 19 March 2006↩

MTR Annual Report 2005 Page 20↩
&quot;Quarry Bay Congestion Relief Works&quot;, Hong Kong Mass Transit InfoCenter, retrieved 19 March 2006↩
&quot;Tseung Kwan O Extension&quot;, Hong Kong Mass Transit InfoCenter, retrieved 19 March 2006↩
&quot;West Rail Interface Works, Kowloon Tong Station Interchange, and Mong Kok Station Enhancements&quot;, MTR Corporation Limited, retrieved 19 March 2006↩

&quot;MTR Disneyland Resort Line&quot;, MTR Corporation Limited, retrieved 17 April 2006↩
&quot;Projects in Progress (Hong Kong)&quot;, MTR Corporation Limited, retrieved 17 April 2006↩
&quot;MTR Corporation Signs Memorandum of Understanding with The Government on Terms of Proposed Rail Merger&quot;, MTR Corporation Limited press release, 11 April 2006''↩
&quot;KCRC welcomes Government&lt;U+2019&gt;s announcement on way forward for rail merger&quot;, Kowloon-Canton Railway Corporation press release, 11 April 2006↩
&quot;Chapter 556B - Mass Transit Railway By-laws&quot;, Department of Justice (Hong Kong), retrieved 19 March 2006↩
L&lt;U+00F3&gt;pez, M.J.J. (1996). Crime Prevention Guidelines for the Construction &amp; Management of Metro Systems. Den Haag: RCM-advies, pg. 32-35.↩
&quot;Platform Screen Door (2002/8)&quot;, MTR Corporation Limited, retrieved 17 April 2006↩
&quot;Funding of platform screen door retrofit programme&quot;, Legislative Council, 5 January 2005.↩
&quot;First 3G Operator to Connect to Four Major MTR line&quot;, www.3G.co.uk, retrieved 7 June 2005.↩
Complimentary service exclusively for Airport Express Passengers, MTR Corporation Limited, retrieved 17 April 2006↩
&quot;Our History&quot;, Octopus Cards Ltd., retrieved 17 April 2006↩

&quot;Hong Kong Tourist Transport Passes&quot;, MTR Corporation Limited, retrieved 17 April 2006↩

&quot;Lantau Line and Airport Railway, Hong Kong&quot;, Railway Technology, retrieved 16 March 2006.↩
&quot;Metro in Hong Kong&quot;, Alstom Transportations, retrieved 16 March 2006↩
&quot;United Group Limited secures $40 million Hong Kong rail maintenance contract&quot;, United Goninan, from Internet Archive↩
&quot;Electric Multiple Unit - For Hong Kong MTR Limited&quot;, Rotem's XG EMU , retrieved 16 March 2006↩
&quot;New trains ordered for Tung Chung Line, Hong Kong&quot;, Rotem press release, retrieved 16 March 2006↩
&quot;Additional Tung Chung Line Trains&quot;, MTR Corporation Limited, retrieved 19 March 2006↩

&quot;art in mtr&quot;, MTR Corporation Limited, retrieved 17 April 2006↩



&quot;West Island Line &amp; South Island Line&quot;, MTR Corporation Limited, 17 April 2006↩


