
The Human Centipede (First Sequence) is a 2009 Dutch horror film written and directed by Tom Six. It stars Dieter Laser, Ashley C. Williams, Ashlynn Yennie, and Akihiro Kitamura. The film tells the story of a German doctor who kidnaps three tourists and joins them surgically, mouth to anus, forming a &quot;human centipede&quot;.1 Having completed the operation, the doctor begins training the centipede, while attempting to hide his actions from the attention of the outside world.
The concept of the film arose from a joke Tom Six made with friends about punishing child molesters by stitching their mouth to the anus of a fat truck driver.2 When approaching investors prior to filming, Six did not mention the mouth-to-anus aspect of the plot, fearing it would put off potential backers. The financiers of The Human Centipede did not discover the full nature of the film until it was complete.3
The Human Centipede received mixed reviews but several accolades at various international film festivals. The film was released in the United States on Video on Demand on April 28, 2010, and in limited release theatrically on April 30. Tom Six began working on a sequel, The Human Centipede (Full Sequence) which will be released in 2011.
Plot
Dr. Heiter kidnaps a truck driver by the side of a road. Later, two US tourists, Lindsay and Jenny, arrive at Heiter's house as they search for help after getting a flat tire. Heiter quickly drugs the women, when they awake they find themselves beside the kidnapped trucker in a makeshift hospital ward in the doctor's basement. Heiter informs the trucker that he is not a match for the women and kills him. When the women wake up, the trucker has been replaced by a new captive, Japanese tourist Katsuro.
The doctor explains to his captives that he is a world-renowned expert at separating conjoined twins, but dreams of making new creatures that share a single digestive system by joining separate individuals via their mouths and anuses. He explains that his previous experiment, a creature made of three Rottweilers, died. However, he explains how he will attach the three human subjects to each other to form what he refers to as a human centipede. The doctor then explains in great detail to his captives exactly how he will go about surgically connecting them. Lindsay attempts to escape, but is unsuccessful. Once the surgery is complete, the doctor begins training his centipede to perform tasks such as fetching newspapers. Katsuro, as the front part of the centipede, refuses to do as he is told, and the doctor beats him. When Katsuro defecates, Lindsay is forced to swallow his excrement and the doctor watches with great delight. However, Heiter eventually becomes irritated after being kept awake by the constant screaming of his victims and realizing that Jenny is dying from blood poisoning.
Two police detectives, Kranz and Voller, visit Heiter to investigate the disappearance of tourists in the area. After the detectives leave, Heiter informs his captives that Jenny will soon be replaced by two new parts. Katsuro stabs him with a scalpel and fails an attempt to rip out Heiter's jugular vein with his teeth, and the centipede attempts to escape as Heiter crawls after the trio. Katsuro faces the doctor with a piece of broken glass in his hand, confessing that he deserved what Heiter did to him because he treated his family poorly, before fatally cutting his own throat with the glass. At this point, the police officers break into the house, and Heiter crawls away to hide in the room with his swimming pool. Kranz is shocked as he discovers Heiter's victims and soon finds Voller dead in the swimming pool near an armed Dr. Heiter. Heiter and Kranz shoot and kill each other. Jenny finally dies from her blood poisoning, leaving Lindsay alone in the house, trapped between her deceased fellow captives.
Cast

Dieter Laser as Dr. Heiter
Ashley C. Williams as Lindsay
Ashlynn Yennie as Jenny
Akihiro Kitamura as Katsuro
Andreas Leupold as Det. Kranz
Peter Blankenstein as Det. Voller

Production
Writing
The inspiration for the film came from a joke Tom Six frequently made to friends about punishing criminals such as child molesters by stitching their mouths to the anus of an overweight truck driver.4 He saw this as the concept for a great horror movie,5 and he began to develop the idea. Six has said he was heavily influenced as a film-maker by the early works of David Cronenberg, as well as Japanese horror films.6 The inclusion of a German villain was a conscious decision, based upon the German invasion of the Netherlands during World War II, and the subsequent Nazi medical experiments.7 World War II also played an influence on the nationality of the other main characters (American and Japanese).8 Six placed a Japanese male at the front of the centipede for two reasons: to create a language barrier between the doctor and the centipede (whose other members were unable to speak), and as he wanted a male and the Doctor to fight.9
Casting
Casting for the film initially took place in New York City and Berlin, with filming undertaken in the Netherlands.1011 Six said that during the casting process, a lot of actresses walked out of readings with disgust upon hearing the full nature of the role.12 Ashlynn Yennie and Ashley C. Williams were selected as the female victims, giving each their first major film role. Having acted and written for a number of films and TV shows previously, Akihiro Kitamura was a relatively experienced cast member, as was Dieter Laser who had previously starred in the TV series Lexx.13
Directing
While seeking funding for the film, Tom Six pitched the idea of a surgeon who sewed people together,14 but he did not initially reveal that the victims would be joined mouth-to-anus, fearing that it would put off potential investors. His backers did not learn the exact details of the film until it had been completed.15 Before signing on, the actors were given an outline of the film's storyboard rather than a complete script.16
Filming
Dieter Laser remained in character as Dr. Heiter during filming. He stayed away from the other actors and crew between scenes to preserve a level of separation, and only ate food he had brought onto the set himself. Laser contributed dialogue for his character, and selected many of his character's outfits from his own personal clothing.17 Due to the discomfort of spending long periods on their hands and knees, the actors playing the centipede were given massages at the end of each day of filming.18
Effects

Dr. Heiter surveys his completed human centipede. The heavy use of bandages in The Human Centipede allowed the film-makers to imply a much more graphic and disturbing idea than what is actually shown on screen throughout the film|alt=A man and two women lie on a sofa in a living room with soft lighting and an abstract painting of conjoined twins on the wall. They lie in a line on their left side, facing the viewer, with the man at the front and the two women behind him. They wear only their underwear and have bloody bandages on their knees. The man's torso is out of shot beyond the right edge of the image. The first woman behind the man has her face obscured behind the man's buttocks and her hands are on his legs. The second woman lies in an identical pose behind the first woman. Behind the sofa is a man in his sixties with short dark hair, wearing a dark suit and red necktie. He leans over the three, looking at the first woman's head

The Human Centipede (First Sequence) contains relatively little explicit imagery, and much of the disturbing content is implied rather than shown directly.19 Although very little of the actual surgical procedure is depicted directly,20 Tom Six wanted the film to be 100% medically accurate21 and consulted a Dutch surgeon during the creation and filming process.22 The surgeon was initially reluctant to take part due to concerns about his professional reputation and feelings that the film had nothing to do with medical science. However, he became interested in the procedure after reading the script, and devised a surgical method that he believed would work in real life.23 Six claims that supplementing the diet of the middle and back parts with an IV drip would allow the centipede to survive for 'years'.24
The special effects team designed the final composition of the centipede from sketches provided by Six's surgeon,25 designing hardened underwear for the actors to wear with a rubber grip for the actor behind to bite onto, which created the illusion of the mouth-to-anus connection.26
Promotion and release
The Human Centipede was included in several film festivals around the world, including the 2009 London FrightFest Film Festival,27 Leeds International Film Festival,28 Sitges Film Festival,29 and Screamfest Horror Film Festival.30 In an interview with JoBlo.com, Tom Six claimed that the buzz surrounding the film led several studios to approach him with regard to distributing the film.31 IFC Films distributed the film in 2010 in the United States and Canada. The film was released on Video on Demand on April 28, 2010; in a limited theatrical release on April 30, 2010;32 and a wider U.S. release from May 7, 2010.33 IFC Films has a history of releasing unconventional horror films, having previously distributed the Norwegian Nazi-zombie feature Dead Snow and the 2009 release Antichrist.34
The film will receive a national release in the UK starting August 20, 2010 3536. The film will be distributed by Bounty Films, a company who in the past have only distributed homosexually themed films37 such as The Big Gay Musical.38 The film was passed uncut by the BBFC and will be released with an 18 rated certificate.39.
DVD/Blu-ray release
The Human Centipede will receive a DVD and Blu-ray release in the United Kingdom on October 4, 201040 and in the United States on October 5, 2010.41
Reception
Critical
Among more mainstream publications, Total Film described the film as a disappointment that proved itself to be a slow-moving, repetitive affair that has nowhere left to go by the hour mark.42 Giving the film three stars out of a potential five, Empire stated that &quot;underneath an extremely repulsive concept, this is a relatively conventional horror movie.&quot;43
Variety Magazine criticized the film's lack of any form of social commentary, stating that it couldn't &quot;be bothered to expand upon its unpleasant premise, inviting audiences to revel in its sick humor by favoring Dr. Heiter&lt;U+2026&gt; and characterizing the victims as shallow expendables.&quot;44
Entertainment Weekly was broadly positive about Dieter Laser's performance as the Doctor, and praised Tom Six's direction, saying Six &quot;has put together his nightmare yarn with Cronenbergian care and precision.&quot;45 However, EW posited &quot;this is the most disgusting horror film of all time.&quot;46
The New York Times questioned whether the film was &quot;a commentary on Nazi atrocities or a literal expression of filmmaking politics, [but] the grotesque fusion at least silences the female leads, both of whose voices could strip paint.&quot;47
Writing in the Chicago Sun Times, Roger Ebert did not assign the film a star rating, explaining that &quot;[usually] I am required to award stars to movies I review. This time, I refuse to do it. The star rating system is unsuited to this film. Is the movie good? Is it bad? Does it matter? It is what it is and occupies a world where the stars don't shine.&quot;48
Among horror blogs the film also received attention. FEARnet gave the film a positive review, stating that it was a horror import that had the confidence and audacity to deliver something disturbingly different.49 Conversely, Cinematical was critical, stating that, while a potential cult hit, all in all it wasn't really a very good film.50
Accolades
Despite mixed reviews, the film won several awards at various international horror film festivals, including the following:

2009:



Best picture at Fantastic Fest, Austin TX51 and Best Actor (Dieter Laser)52 in the horror category.
Best Movie at Screamfest LA53
Best Movie at Sainte Maxime International Horror Film Festival54
Best Movie at Ravenna Nightmare Film Festival55
Best Ensemble Cast at South African Horror Film Festival56
Audience award at Haapsalu Horror and Fantasy Film Festival, Estonia

In May 2010, Internet humor site I-Mockery released a flash game of the film on Newgrounds, which mimicked the classic Centipede arcade game.57
A pornographic parody of the film, directed by Tom Byron and entitled The Human Sexipede, will be released in October 2010.58
Sequel
A sequel, titled The Human Centipede II (Full Sequence) has been planned for theaters in 2011, with filming starting in London in June 2010.59 Full Sequence will supposedly include a centipede composed of twelve individuals.60 Tom Six has stated that the first film will get audiences used to the idea of a human centipede, preparing them for the idea of a much more graphic and disturbing sequel, First Sequence being &quot;'My Little Pony compared with part two.&quot;61 Tom Six has claimed that he is developing ideas for a third part, but wants to see what will happen with the second part first.62
References

External links








Facebook


cy:The Human Centipede (First Sequence) de:The Human Centipede (First Sequence) es:The Human Centipede (First Sequence) eo:The Human Centipede (First Sequence) fr:The Human Centipede (First Sequence) it:The Human Centipede (First Sequence) nl:The Human Centipede (First Sequence) pt:The Human Centipede (First Sequence) sq:The Human Centipede (First Sequence) simple:The Human Centipede (First Sequence) sv:The Human Centipede (First Sequence)
Category:2009 films Category:2000s horror films Category:Dutch films Category:Dutch horror films Category:English-language films Category:German-language films Category:Japanese-language films













































http://www.empireonline.com/reviews/reviewcomplete.asp?FID=136905↩


↩











http://news.avn.com/articles/Tom-Byron-Pictures-Enters-Parody-Market-407276.html↩






