

The Archaeological Museum of Nikopolis is a museum in Nicopolis, of the Preveza Prefecture in Greece.
History
Until the year 1940, the &lt;U+2018&gt;&lt;U+2019&gt;Archaeological Museum of Preveza &lt;U+2013&gt; Nikopolis&lt;U+2019&gt;&lt;U+2019&gt; was located in an Ottoman mosque, in the city of Preveza, Greece. In the year 1940, the mosque was bombed by Italian aircraft and was partially destroyed. Some of the exhibits were stolen. After the Second World War, the mosque was demolished by the Greek state. In the year 1965 the state built a small Archaeological Museum inside the Byzantine walls of ancient Nikopolis. From 1998 to 2006 a new archaeological museum was built 5 km North of Preveza,but it will not open until 2010.
Exhibits

Marble tomb sculpture, with the name of the deceased, his father, his profession, his age.
Marble oblation altar, dedicated to the Empress Sabine, wife of Emperor Marcus Aurelius.
Marble sarcophagus, with lions, flowers, etc.
Marble sitting lion of the 4th century BC
Marble statue of goodness Minerva - a roman copy of 4th century bC
Marble statue of a muse, called the &quot;small Heracliotis&quot;
Broken marble head of General Agrippa, reconstructed.
Marble head of Faustina, wife of Emperor Marcus Aurelius, who appears to suffer from strabismus.
Marble Cylindrical base of a statue, with a relief the Battle of the Amazons (Amazonomachia). It has been partially reused as a Christian mosaic, from the Alkysson Basilica.
Marble plaque with ancient symposium (a postcital man and a woman)
Glass urn, coins, and hair pins from Odeum.
New exhibits: Many important new exhibits are being prepared for the new museum, and will go on display in 2010. Many of them were found at the site of the Monument of Augustus between the years 1995-2005.

External links

Hellenic Ministry of Culture and Tourism
www.planetware.com
http://prevezamuseum.spaces.live.com Search with your browser for Archaeological Museum of Nicopolis (not Nikopolis) and press on the right column link to get an excellent slide-show of the museums (old and new) and many of the exhibits.


Nikopolis
