
Upper Hutt railway station is a single platform, urban railway station serving the city of Upper Hutt in the Wellington region of New Zealand&lt;U+2019&gt;s North Island. The station lies on the Wairarapa Line, and is located on Station Crescent, which is off Fergusson Drive. This station is served by Wairarapa Connection (as a through station) and Tranz Metro Electric Multiple Unit (as a terminus station) trains.
This station has a ticket office, and also handles some freight traffic with a neighbouring timber processing company. It is within sight of the Upper Hutt Police Station and Upper Hutt City Council chambers, and next to a shopping precinct. Fergusson Drive used to be the main thoroughfare for traffic between the northern suburbs and Wairarapa to the Lower Hutt district prior to the opening of River Road.
History
Construction of the Wairarapa Line to Upper Hutt was covered by the River Contract, which was let to contractor Charles McKirdy. The rails reached Upper Hutt in January 1876. Severe flooding at the end of January caused the road between Upper Hutt and Taita to become blocked and damaged, and so to minimise the impact caused by delays to road traffic, the Upper Hutt station was opened on 1 February, despite the concerns of the Public Works Department that the move was premature. The station was not ready for business, as the station and ancillary buildings had not been completed. However, the line and station were handed over to the Provincial Council to run while construction of the line beyond Upper Hutt commenced.
With the line open as far as Upper Hutt, traffic began to increase. Goods traffic initially comprised mostly of timber, followed closely by wool. Passenger services comprised of three weekday return services to Wellington. One effect of the introduction of services between Wellington and Upper Hutt was the reduction in road coach services, which, from the north, terminated at Upper Hutt. Goods wagons, however, continued on to Wellington. Still, railway traffic benefited by a 50% increase due to the establishment of the railhead at Upper Hutt.
The year the station opened, it gained a fourth-class station building, goods shed, coal store, two-road engine shed and two water tanks for the sum of &lt;U+00A3&gt;2,040. In 1955, as part of the station upgrading programme for the imminent arrival of electric multiple unit working of the Hutt Valley Line, a new station building was erected at Upper Hutt.
While trains only operated as far north as Upper Hutt, they were not protected by fixed signals. It was felt that as services were few, slow, and operated only in daylight hours, signals were not necessary. Upper Hutt was one of the first stations on the Wairarapa Line to receive signals, with initial instructions requiring south-bound trains to wait in the siding or loop, and north-bound trains to take the main line. These signals were first listed in the working timetables of 1887. By 1921, increased traffic was causing operational issues, and it was decided to install new automatic signalling which had been recently developed in the United States. Work began in 1921, and by early 1923 was operating between Wellington and Upper Hutt. In 1955, with the opening of the Rimutaka Tunnel and deviation, a Centralised Traffic Control system was installed at Upper Hutt station to control main line points and signals between Trentham and Featherston. The signals used were of the colour light variety. Train control has since been centralised in Wellington.
All locomotive hauled passenger trains between Wellington and Upper Hutt were replaced with electric multiple units from 24 July 1955.
Services
The following Metlink bus routes connect with Upper Hutt station:

91: Airport Flyer
110: Upper Hutt
111: Totara Park
112: Te Marua
114: Poets Block
115: Pinehaven

References

Cameron, Walter Norman. A Line Of Railway: The Railway Conquest of the Rimutakas. Wellington: New Zealand Railway &amp; Locomotive Society, Inc., 1976, ISBN 0-908573-00-6.
Churchman, Geoffrey B. &amp; Hurst, Tony. The Railways of New Zealand: A Journey Through History. Wellington: Transpress New Zealand, 2001, ISBN 0-908876-20-3.

External Links

Passenger service timetables from Metlink and Tranz Metro.

Category:Rail transport in Wellington Railway stations
