



David Bowie ( ;1 born David Robert Jones, 8 January 1947) is an English rock musician, who has also worked as an actor, record producer and arranger. A major figure for five decades in the world of popular music, Bowie is widely regarded as an innovator, particularly for his work in the 1970s, and is known for his distinctive voice and the intellectual depth of his work.
Although he released an album (David Bowie) and several singles earlier, Bowie first caught the eye and ear of the public in July 1969, when the song &quot;Space Oddity&quot; reached the top five of the UK Singles Chart. After a three-year period of experimentation he re-emerged in 1972 during the glam rock era as the flamboyant, androgynous alter ego Ziggy Stardust, spearheaded by the hit single &quot;Starman&quot; and the album The Rise and Fall of Ziggy Stardust and the Spiders from Mars. Bowie's impact at that time, as described by biographer David Buckley, &quot;challenged the core belief of the rock music of its day&quot; and &quot;created perhaps the biggest cult in popular culture.&quot;2 The relatively short-lived Ziggy persona proved merely one facet of a career marked by continual reinvention, musical innovation and striking visual presentation.
In 1975, Bowie achieved his first major American crossover success with the number-one single &quot;Fame&quot;, co-written with John Lennon, and the hit album Young Americans, which the singer characterised as &quot;plastic soul&quot;. The sound constituted a radical shift in style that initially alienated many of his UK devotees. He then confounded the expectations of both his record label and his American audiences by recording the minimalist album Low (1977)&lt;U+2014&gt;the first of three collaborations with Brian Eno over the next two years. The so-called &quot;Berlin Trilogy&quot; albums all reached the UK top five and garnered lasting critical praise.
After uneven commercial success in the late 1970s, Bowie had UK number ones with the 1980 single &quot;Ashes to Ashes&quot; and its parent album, Scary Monsters (and Super Creeps). He paired with Queen for the 1981 UK chart-topping single &quot;Under Pressure&quot;, then reached a new commercial peak in 1983 with the album Let's Dance, which yielded the hit singles &quot;Let's Dance&quot;, &quot;China Girl&quot;, and &quot;Modern Love&quot;. Throughout the 1990s and 2000s, Bowie continued to experiment with musical styles, including blue-eyed soul, industrial, adult contemporary, and jungle. His last recorded album was Reality (2003), which was supported by the 2003&lt;U+2013&gt;2004 Reality Tour.
Buckley says of Bowie, &quot;His influence has been unique in popular culture&lt;U+2014&gt;he has permeated and altered more lives than any comparable figure.&quot;3 In the BBC's 2002 poll of the 100 Greatest Britons, Bowie was placed at number 29. Throughout his career, he has sold an estimated 136 million albums. In the United Kingdom, he has been awarded 9 Platinum album certifications, 11 Gold and 8 Silver, and in the United States, 5 Platinum and 7 Gold certifications. In 2004, Rolling Stone ranked him 39th on their list of the &quot;100 Greatest Rock Artists of All Time&quot;, and 23rd on their list of the best singers of all-time.
History
1947&lt;U+2013&gt;62: Early years
David Bowie was born David Robert Jones in Brixton, London on 8 January 1947. His mother, Margaret Mary &quot;Peggy&quot; (n&lt;U+00E9&gt;e Burns), of Irish descent, worked as a cinema usherette, while his father, Haywood Stenton &quot;John&quot; Jones, was a promotions officer for Barnardo's. The family lived at 40 Stansfield Road, located near the border of the south London suburbs of Brixton and Stockwell. A neighbour recalled that in a world still feeling the effects of post-war depression, &quot;London in the forties was the worst possible place, and the worst possible time for a child to grow up in.&quot; Bowie attended Stockwell Infants School until he was six years old, acquiring a reputation as a gifted and single-minded child&lt;U+2014&gt;and a defiant brawler.45
The family moved in 1953 to another nearby suburb, Bromley, where, two years later, Bowie progressed to Burnt Ash Junior School. His singing voice was considered &quot;adequate&quot; by the school choir, and his recorder playing judged to demonstrate above-average musical ability.6 At the age of nine, his dancing during the newly introduced music and movement classes was strikingly imaginative: teachers called his interpretations &quot;vividly artistic&quot; and his poise &quot;astonishing&quot; for a child.7 The same year, his interest in music was further stimulated when his father brought home a collection of American 45s by artists including Frankie Lymon and the Teenagers, The Platters, Fats Domino, Elvis Presley and Little Richard.89 Upon listening to &quot;Tutti Frutti&quot;, Bowie would later say, &quot;I had heard God&quot;.10 Presley's impact on him was likewise emphatic: &quot;I saw a cousin of mine dance to ... 'Hound Dog' and I had never seen her get up and be moved so much by anything. It really impressed me, the power of the music. I started getting records immediately after that.&quot;11 By the end of the following year he had taken up the ukelele and tea-chest bass and begun to participate in skiffle sessions with friends, and had started to play the piano; meanwhile his stage presentation of numbers by both Presley and Chuck Berry&lt;U+2014&gt;complete with gyrations in tribute to the original artists&lt;U+2014&gt;to his local Wolf Cub group was described as12 Failing his eleven plus exam at the conclusion of his Burnt Ash Junior education, Bowie joined Bromley Technical High School.13
It was an unusual technical school, as biographer Christopher Sandford writes: 
Bowie studied art, music and design, including layout and typsetting. After Terry Burns, his half-brother, introduced him to modern jazz, his enthusiasm for players like Charles Mingus and John Coltrane led his mother to give him a plastic alto saxophone in 1961; he was soon receiving lessons from a local musician.14 He received a serious injury at school in 1962 when his friend George Underwood, wearing a ring on his finger, punched him in the left eye during a fight over a girl. Doctors feared he would lose the sight of the eye, and he was forced to stay out of school for a series of operations during a four-month hospitalisation.15 The damage could not be fully repaired, leaving him with faulty depth perception and a permanently dilated pupil (the latter producing Bowie's appearance of having different coloured eyes, though each iris has the same blue colour). Despite their fisticuffs, Underwood and Bowie remained good friends, and Underwood went on to create the artwork for Bowie's early albums.16
1962&lt;U+2013&gt;68: The Kon-rads to the Riot Squad
Graduating from his plastic saxophone to a real instrument in 1962, Bowie formed his first band at the age of 15. Playing guitar-based rock and roll at local youth gatherings and weddings, the Kon-rads had a varying line-up of between four and eight members, Underwood among them.17 When Bowie left the technical school the following year, he informed his parents of his intention to become a pop star. His mother promptly arranged his employment as an electrician's mate. Frustrated by his band-mates' limited aspirations, Bowie left the Kon-rads and formed another band, the King Bees. He wrote to the newly successful washing-machine entrepreneur John Bloom inviting him to &quot;do for us what Brian Epstein has done for the Beatles&lt;U+2014&gt;and make another million.&quot; Bloom did not respond to the offer, but his referral to Dick James's partner Leslie Conn led to Bowie's first personal management contract.18
Conn quickly began to promote Bowie. The singer's debut single, &quot;Liza Jane&quot;, credited to Davie Jones and the King Bees, had no commercial success. Dissatisfied with the King Bees and their repertoire of Howlin' Wolf and Willie Dixon blues numbers, Bowie quit the band less than a month later to join the Manish Boys, another blues outfit, who incorporated folk and soul&lt;U+2014&gt;&quot;I used to dream of being their Mick Jagger&quot;, Bowie was to recall.19 &quot;I Pity the Fool&quot; was no more successful than &quot;Liza Jane&quot;, and Bowie soon moved on again to join the Lower Third, a blues trio strongly influenced by The Who. &quot;You've Got a Habit of Leaving&quot; fared no better, signalling the end of Conn's contract. Declaring that he would exit the pop world &quot;to study mime at Sadler's Wells&quot;, Bowie nevertheless remained with the Lower Third. His new manager, Ralph Horton, later instrumental in his transition to solo artist, soon witnessed Bowie's move to yet another group, the Buzz, yielding the singer's fifth unsuccessful single release, &quot;Do Anything You Say&quot;. While with the Buzz, Bowie also joined the Riot Squad; their recordings, which included a Bowie number and Velvet Underground material, went unreleased. Ken Pitt, introduced by Horton, took over as Bowie's manager.20
Dissatisfied with his stage name as Davy (and Davie) Jones, which in the mid-1960s invited confusion with Davy Jones of The Monkees, Bowie re-named himself after the 19th century American frontiersman Jim Bowie and the knife he had popularised.21 His April 1967 solo single, &quot;The Laughing Gnome&quot;, utilising sped-up Chipmunk-style vocals, failed to chart. Released six weeks later, his album debut, David Bowie, an amalgam of pop, psychedelia, and music hall, met the same fate. It would be his last release for two years.22
Bowie's fascination with the bizarre was fuelled when he met dancer Lindsay Kemp: &quot;He lived on his emotions, he was a wonderful influence. His day-to-day life was the most theatrical thing I had ever seen, ever. It was everything I thought Bohemia probably was. I joined the circus.&quot;23 Kemp, for his part, recalled, &quot;I didn't really teach him to be a mime artiste but to be more of himself on the outside, ... I enabled him to free the angel and demon that he is on the inside.&quot;24 Studying the dramatic arts under Kemp, from avant-garde theatre and mime to Commedia dell'arte, Bowie became immersed in the creation of personae to present to the world. Satirising life in a British prison, meanwhile, the Bowie-penned &quot;Over the Wall We Go&quot; became a 1967 single for Oscar; another Bowie composition, &quot;Silly Boy Blue&quot;, was released by Billy Fury the following year.25 After Kemp cast Bowie with Hermione Farthingale for a poetic minuet, the pair began dating; they soon moved into a London flat together. Playing acoustic guitar, she formed a group with Bowie and bassist John Hutchinson; between September 1968 and early 1969, when Bowie and Farthingale broke up, the trio gave a small number of concerts combining folk, Merseybeat, poetry and mime.26
1969&lt;U+2013&gt;73: Psychedelic folk to glam rock
Space Oddity to Hunky Dory
Because of his lack of commercial success, Bowie was forced to try to earn a living in different ways. He featured in a Lyons Maid ice cream commercial, but was rejected for another by Kit Kat.27 Intended as a vehicle to promote the singer, a 30-minute film featuring performances from his repertoire, Love You till Tuesday, was made. Although not released until 1984, the filming sessions in January 1969 led to unexpected success when Bowie told the producers, &quot;That film of yours&lt;U+2014&gt;I've got a new song for it.&quot; He then demoed the song that would provide his commercial breakthrough. &quot;Space Oddity&quot; was released later in the year to coincide with the first moon landing.28 Breaking up with Farthingale shortly after completion of the film, Bowie moved in with Mary Finnigan as her lodger.29 Continuing the divergence from rock and roll and blues begun by his work with Farthingale, Bowie joined forces with Finnigan, Christina Ostrom and Barrie Jackson to run a folk club on Sunday nights at the Three Tuns pub in Beckenham High Street.30 This soon morphed into the Beckenham Arts Lab, and became extremely popular. The Arts Lab hosted a free festival in a local park, later immortalised by Bowie in his song &quot;Memory of a Free Festival&quot;.31 &quot;Space Oddity&quot; was released on 11 July, five days ahead of the Apollo 11 launch, to become a UK top five hit. Bowie's second album, Space Oddity, followed in November; originally issued in the UK as David Bowie, it caused some confusion with its predecessor of the same name, and the early US release was instead titled Man of Words/Man of Music. Featuring philosophical post-hippie lyrics on peace, love and morality, its acoustic folk rock occasionally fortified by harder rock, the album was not a commercial success at the time of its release.32

Bowie met Angela Barnett in April 1969. They would marry within a year. Her impact on him was immediate, and her involvement in his career far-reaching, leaving Pitt with limited influence.33 Having established himself as a solo artist with &quot;Space Oddity&quot;, Bowie now began to sense a lack: &quot;a full-time band for gigs and recording&lt;U+2014&gt;people he could relate to personally&quot;.34 The shortcoming was underlined by his artistic rivalry with Marc Bolan, who was at the time acting as his session guitarist.35 A band was duly assembled. John Cambridge, a drummer Bowie met at the Arts Lab, was joined by Tony Visconti on bass and Mick Ronson on electric guitar. After a brief and disastrous manifestation as the Hype, the group reverted to a configuration presenting Bowie as a solo artist.36 Their initial studio work was marred by a heated disagreement between Bowie and Cambridge over the latter's drumming style; matters came to a head when Bowie, enraged, accused, &quot;You're fucking up my album.&quot; Cambridge summarily quit and was replaced by Mick Woodmansey.37 Not long after, in a move that would result in years of litigation, at the conclusion of which Bowie would be forced to pay Pitt compensation, the singer fired his manager, replacing him with Tony Defries.38
The studio sessions continued and resulted in Bowie's third album, The Man Who Sold the World (1970). Characterised by the heavy rock sound of his new backing band, it was a marked departure from the acoustic guitar and folk rock style established by Space Oddity. To promote it in the United States, Mercury Records financed a coast-to-coast publicity tour in which Bowie, between January and February 1971, was interviewed by radio stations and the media. Exploiting his androgynous appearance, the original cover of the UK version unveiled two months later would depict the singer wearing a dress: taking the garment with him, he wore it during interviews&lt;U+2014&gt;to the approval of critics, including Rolling Stone{{'}}s John Mendelsohn who described him as &quot;ravishing, almost disconcertingly reminiscent of Lauren Bacall&quot;&lt;U+2014&gt;and in the street, to mixed reaction including laughter and, in the case of one male pedestrian, producing a gun and telling Bowie to &quot;kiss my ass&quot;.3940 During the tour Bowie's observation of two seminal American proto-punk artists led him to develop a concept that would eventually find form in the Ziggy Stardust character: a melding of the persona of Iggy Pop with the music of Lou Reed, producing &quot;the ultimate pop idol&quot;.41 A girlfriend recalled his &quot;scrawling notes on a cocktail napkin about a crazy rock star named Iggy or Ziggy&quot;, and on his return to England he declared his intention to create a character &quot;who looks like he's landed from Mars.&quot;42
Hunky Dory (1971) found Visconti, Bowie's producer and bassist, supplanted in both roles, by Ken Scott and Trevor Bolder respectively. The album saw the partial return of the fey pop singer of &quot;Space Oddity&quot;, with light fare such as &quot;Kooks&quot;, a song written for his son, Duncan Zowie Haywood Jones, born on 30 May.43 (His parents chose &quot;his kooky name&quot;&lt;U+2014&gt;he would be known as Zowie for the next 12 years&lt;U+2014&gt;after the Greek word zoe, life.)44 Elsewhere, the album explored more serious themes, and found Bowie paying unusually direct homage to his influences with &quot;Song for Bob Dylan&quot;, &quot;Andy Warhol&quot;, and &quot;Queen Bitch&quot;, a Velvet Underground pastiche. It was not a significant commercial success at the time.45
Ziggy Stardust
 With his next venture, Bowie, in the words of biographer David Buckley, &quot;challenged the core belief of the rock music of its day&quot; and &quot;created perhaps the biggest cult in popular culture&quot;.46 Dressed in a striking costume, his hair dyed red, Bowie launched his Ziggy Stardust stage show with the Spiders from Mars&lt;U+2014&gt;Ronson, Bolder and Woodmansey&lt;U+2014&gt;at the Toby Jug pub in Tolworth on 10 February 1972.47 The show was hugely popular, catapulting him to stardom as he toured the UK over the course of the next six months and creating, as described by Buckley, a &quot;cult of Bowie&quot; that was &quot;unique—its influence lasted longer and has been more creative than perhaps almost any other force within pop fandom.&quot;48 The Rise and Fall of Ziggy Stardust and the Spiders from Mars (1972), combining the hard rock elements of The Man Who Sold the World with the lighter experimental rock and pop of Hunky Dory, was released in June. &quot;Starman&quot;, issued as an April single ahead of the album, was to cement Bowie's UK breakthrough: both single and album charted rapidly following his July Top of the Pops performance of the song. The album, which would remain in the chart for two years, was soon joined there by the six-month-old Hunky Dory. At the same time the non-album single &quot;John, I&lt;U+2019&gt;m Only Dancing&quot;, and &quot;All the Young Dudes&quot;, a song he wrote and produced for Mott the Hoople, became UK hits. The Ziggy Stardust Tour continued to the United States.49
Bowie contributed backing vocals to Reed's 1972 solo breakthrough Transformer, co-producing the album with Ronson.50 His own Aladdin Sane (1973) topped the UK chart, his first number one album. Described by Bowie as &quot;Ziggy goes to America&quot;, it contained songs he wrote while travelling to and across the United States during the earlier part of the Ziggy tour, which now continued to Japan to promote the new album. Aladdin Sane spawned the UK top five singles &quot;The Jean Genie&quot; and &quot;Drive-In Saturday&quot;.5152
Bowie's love of acting led his total immersion in the characters he created for his music. &quot;Offstage I'm a robot. Onstage I achieve emotion. It's probably why I prefer dressing up as Ziggy to being David.&quot; With satisfaction came severe personal difficulties: acting the same role over an extended period, it became impossible for him to separate Ziggy Stardust&lt;U+2014&gt;and, later, the Thin White Duke&lt;U+2014&gt;from his own character offstage. Ziggy, Bowie said, &quot;wouldn't leave me alone for years. That was when it all started to go sour ... My whole personality was affected. It became very dangerous. I really did have doubts about my sanity.&quot;53 His later Ziggy shows, which included songs from both Ziggy Stardust and Aladdin Sane, were ultra-theatrical affairs filled with shocking stage moments, such as Bowie stripping down to a sumo wrestling loincloth or simulating oral sex with Ronson's guitar.54 Bowie toured and gave press conferences as Ziggy before a dramatic and abrupt on-stage &quot;retirement&quot; at London's Hammersmith Odeon on 3 July 1973. Footage from the final show was released in 1983 for the film Ziggy Stardust and the Spiders from Mars.55

After breaking up the Spiders from Mars, Bowie attempted to move on from his Ziggy persona. His back catalogue was now highly sought: The Man Who Sold the World had been re-released in 1972 along with Space Oddity. &quot;Life on Mars?&quot;, from Hunky Dory, was released in June 1973 and made number three in the UK singles chart. Entering the same chart in September, Bowie's novelty record from 1967, &quot;The Laughing Gnome&quot;, would reach number four.56 Pin Ups, a collection of covers of his 1960s favourites, followed in October, producing a UK number three hit in &quot;Sorrow&quot; and itself peaking at number one, making David Bowie the best-selling act of 1973 in the UK. It brought the total number of Bowie albums currently in the UK chart to six.57
1974&lt;U+2013&gt;76: Soul, funk and the Thin White Duke
 Bowie moved to the United States in 1974, initially staying in New York City before settling in Los Angeles.58 Diamond Dogs (1974), parts of which found him heading towards soul and funk, was the product of two distinct ideas: a musical based on a wild future in a post-apocalyptic city, and setting George Orwell's 1984 to music.59 The album went to number one in the UK, spawning the hits &quot;Rebel Rebel&quot; and &quot;Diamond Dogs&quot;, and number five in the US. To promote it, Bowie launched the Diamond Dogs Tour, visiting cities in North America between June and December 1974. Choreographed by Toni Basil, and lavishly produced with theatrical special effects, the high-budget stage production was filmed by Alan Yentob. The resulting documentary, Cracked Actor, featured a pasty and emaciated Bowie: the tour coincided with the singer's slide from heavy cocaine use into addiction, producing severe physical debilitation, paranoia and emotional problems.60 He later commented that the accompanying live album, David Live, ought to have been titled &quot;David Bowie Is Alive and Well and Living Only In Theory&quot;. David Live nevertheless solidified Bowie's status as a superstar, charting at number two in the UK and number eight in the US. It also spawned a UK number ten hit in Bowie's cover of &quot;Knock on Wood&quot;. After a break in Philadelphia, where Bowie recorded new material, the tour resumed with a new emphasis on soul.61
The fruit of the Philadelphia recording sessions was Young Americans (1975). Biographer Christopher Sandford writes, &quot;Over the years, most British rockers had tried, one way or another, to become black-by-extension. Few had succeeded as Bowie did now.&quot;62 The album's sound, which the singer identified as &quot;plastic soul&quot;, constituted a radical shift in style that initially alienated many of his UK devotees.63 Young Americans yielded Bowie's first US number one, &quot;Fame&quot;, co-written with John Lennon, who contributed backing vocals, and Carlos Alomar. Earning the distinction of being one of the first white artists to appear on the US variety show Soul Train, Bowie mimed &quot;Fame&quot;, as well as &quot;Golden Years&quot;, his October single.64 Young Americans was a commercial success in both the US and the UK, and a re-issue of the 1969 single &quot;Space Oddity&quot; became Bowie's first number one hit in the UK a few months after &quot;Fame&quot; achieved the same in the US.65
Despite his by now well established superstardom, Bowie, in the words of biographer Christopher Sandford, &quot;for all his record sales (over a million copies of Ziggy Stardust alone), existed essentially on loose change.&quot;66 In 1975, in a move echoing Pitt's acrimonious dismissal 15 years earlier, Bowie fired his manager. At the culmination of the ensuing months-long legal dispute, he watched, as described by Sandford, &quot;millions of dollars of his future earnings being surrendered&quot; in what were &quot;uniquely generous terms for Defries&quot;, then &quot;shut himself up in West 20th Street, where for a week his howls could be heard through the locked attic door.&quot;67 Michael Lippman, Bowie's lawyer during the negotiations, became his new manager; Lippman in turn would be awarded substantial compensation when Bowie fired him the following year.68
 Station to Station (1976) introduced a new Bowie persona, the &quot;Thin White Duke&quot; of its title track. Visually, the character was an extension of Thomas Jerome Newton, the extraterrestrial being he portrayed in the film The Man Who Fell to Earth the same year.69 Developing the funk and soul of Young Americans, Station to Station also prefigured the Krautrock and synthesiser music of his next releases. The extent to which drug addiction was now affecting Bowie was made public when Russell Harty interviewed the singer for his London Weekend Television talk show in anticipation of the album's supporting tour. Shortly before the satellite-linked interview was scheduled to commence, the death of the Spanish dictator General Franco was announced. Bowie was asked to relinquish the satellite booking, to allow the Spanish Government to put out a live newsfeed. This he refused to do, and his interview went ahead. In the ensuing conversation with Harty, as described by biographer David Buckley, &quot;the singer made hardly any sense at all throughout what was quite an extensive interview. [...] Bowie looked completely disconnected and was hardly able to utter a coherent sentence.&quot;70 His sanity&lt;U+2014&gt;by his own later admission&lt;U+2014&gt;became twisted from cocaine; he overdosed several times during the year, and was withering physically to an alarming degree.7172
Station to Station{{'}}s January 1976 release was followed in February by a three-and-a-half-month concert tour of Europe and North America. Featuring a starkly lit set, the Isolar &lt;U+2013&gt; 1976 Tour highlighted songs from the album, including the dramatic and lengthy title track, the ballads &quot;Wild Is the Wind&quot; and &quot;Word on a Wing&quot;, and the funkier &quot;TVC 15&quot; and &quot;Stay&quot;. The core band that coalesced around this album and tour&lt;U+2014&gt;rhythm guitarist Alomar, bassist George Murray, and drummer Dennis Davis&lt;U+2014&gt;would continue as a stable unit for the remainder of the 1970s. The tour was highly successful but mired in political controversy. Bowie was quoted in Stockholm as saying that &quot;Britain could benefit from a Fascist leader&quot;, and detained by customs on the Russian/Polish border for possessing Nazi paraphernalia.73 Matters came to a head in London in May in what became known as the &quot;Victoria Station incident&quot;. Arriving in an open-top Mercedes convertible, the singer waved to the crowd in a gesture that some alleged was a Nazi salute, which was captured on camera and published in NME. Bowie said the photographer simply caught him in mid-wave.74 He later blamed his pro-Fascism comments and his behaviour during the period on his addictions and the character of the Thin White Duke.75 &quot;I was out of my mind, totally crazed. The main thing I was functioning on was mythology ... that whole thing about Hitler and Rightism ... I'd discovered King Arthur ...&quot;.76 According to playwright Alan Franks, writing later in The Times, &quot;he was indeed 'deranged'. He had some very bad experiences with hard drugs.&quot;77
1976&lt;U+2013&gt;79: The Berlin era
 Bowie moved to Switzerland in 1976, purchasing a chalet in the hills to the north of Lake Geneva. In the new environment, his cocaine use increased; so too did his interest in pursuits outside his musical career. He took up painting, producing a number of post-modernist pieces. When on tour, he took to sketching in a notebook, and photographing scenes for later reference. Visiting galleries in Geneva and the Br&lt;U+00FC&gt;cke Museum in Berlin, Bowie became, in the words of biographer Christopher Sandford, &quot;a prolific producer and collector of contemporary art. [...] Not only did he become a well-known patron of expressionist art: locked in Clos des Mésanges he began an intensive self-improvement course in classical music and literature, and started work on an autobiography&quot;.78
Before the end of 1976, Bowie's interest in the burgeoning German music scene, as well as his drug addiction, prompted him to move to West Berlin to clean up and revitalise his career. Working with Brian Eno while sharing an apartment in Sch&lt;U+00F6&gt;neberg with Iggy Pop, he began to focus on minimalist, ambient music for the first of three albums, co-produced with Tony Visconti, that would become known as his Berlin Trilogy.79 During the same period, Pop, with Bowie as a co-writer and musician, completed his solo album debut, The Idiot, and its follow-up, Lust for Life, touring the UK, Europe, and the US in March and April 1977.80 Low (1977), partly influenced by the Krautrock sound of Kraftwerk and Neu!, evidenced a move away from narration in Bowie's songwriting to a more abstract musical form in which lyrics were sporadic and optional. It received considerable negative criticism upon its release&lt;U+2014&gt;a release which RCA, anxious to maintain the established commercial momentum, did not welcome, and which Bowie's ex-manager, Tony Defries, who still maintained a significant financial interest in the singer's affairs, tried to prevent. Despite these forebodings, Low yielded the UK number three single &quot;Sound and Vision&quot;, and its own performance surpassed that of Station to Station in the UK chart, where it reached number two. Leading contemporary composer Phillip Glass described Low as &quot;a work of genius&quot; in 1992, when he used it as the basis for his Symphony No. 1 &quot;Low&quot;; subsequently, Glass used Bowie's next album as the basis for his 1996 Symphony No. 4 &quot;Heroes&quot;.8182 Glass has praised Bowie's gift for creating &quot;fairly complex pieces of music, masquerading as simple pieces&quot;.83

Echoing Low{{'}}s minimalist, instrumental approach, the second of the trilogy, &quot;Heroes&quot; (1977), incorporated pop and rock to a greater extent, seeing Bowie joined by guitarist Robert Fripp. Like Low, &quot;Heroes&quot; evinced the zeitgeist of the Cold War, symbolised by the divided city of Berlin.84 Incorporating ambient sounds from a variety of sources including white noise generators, synthesizers and koto, the album was another hit, reaching number three in the UK. Its title track, though only reaching number 24 in the UK singles chart, gained lasting popularity, and within months had been released in both German and French.85 Towards the end of the year, Bowie performed the song for Marc Bolan's television show Marc, and again two days later for Bing Crosby's televised Christmas special, when he joined Crosby in &quot;Peace on Earth/Little Drummer Boy&quot;, a version of &quot;The Little Drummer Boy&quot; with a new, contrapuntal verse. Five years later, the duet would prove a worldwide seasonal hit, charting in the UK at number three on Christmas Day, 1982.86
After completing Low and &quot;Heroes&quot;, Bowie spent much of 1978 on the Isolar II world tour, bringing the music of the first two Berlin Trilogy albums to almost a million people during 70 concerts in 12 countries. By now he had broken his drug addiction; biographer David Buckley writes that Isolar II was &quot;Bowie's first tour for five years in which he had probably not anaesthetised himself with copious quantities of cocaine before taking the stage. [...] Without the oblivion that drugs had brought, he was now in a healthy enough mental condition to want to make friends.&quot;87 Recordings from the tour made up the live album Stage, released the same year.88
The final piece in what Bowie called his &quot;triptych&quot;, Lodger (1979), eschewed the minimalist, ambient nature of the other two, making a partial return to the drum and guitar based rock and pop of his pre-Berlin era. The result was a complex mixture of New Wave and World Music, in places incorporating Hejaz non-Western scales. Some tracks were composed using Eno and Peter Schmidt's Oblique Strategies cards: &quot;Boys Keep Swinging&quot; entailed band members swapping instruments, &quot;Move On&quot; used the chords from Bowie's early composition &quot;All the Young Dudes&quot; played backwards, and &quot;Red Money&quot; took backing tracks from &quot;Sister Midnight&quot;, a piece previously composed with Iggy Pop.89 The album was recorded in Switzerland. Ahead of its release, RCA's Mel Ilberman stated, &quot;It would be fair to call it Bowie's Sergeant Pepper [...] a concept album that portrays the Lodger as a homeless wanderer, shunned and victimized by life's pressures and technology.&quot; As described by biographer Christopher Sandford, &quot;The record dashed such high hopes with dubious choices, and production that spelt the end&lt;U+2014&gt;for fifteen years&lt;U+2014&gt;of Bowie's partnership with Eno.&quot; Lodger reached number 4 in the UK and number 20 in the US, and yielded the UK hit singles &quot;Boys Keep Swinging&quot; and &quot;DJ&quot;.9091 Towards the end of the year, Bowie and Angela initiated divorce proceedings, and after months of court battles the marriage was ended in early 1980.92
1980&lt;U+2013&gt;89: From superstar to megastar
Scary Monsters (and Super Creeps) (1980) produced the number one hit &quot;Ashes to Ashes&quot;, featuring the textural work of guitar-synthesist Chuck Hammer and revisiting the character of Major Tom from &quot;Space Oddity&quot;. The song gave international exposure to the underground New Romantic movement when Bowie visited the London club &quot;Blitz&quot;&lt;U+2014&gt;the main New Romantic hangout&lt;U+2014&gt;to recruit several of the regulars (including Steve Strange of the band Visage) to act in the accompanying video, renowned as one of the most innovative of all time.93 While Scary Monsters utilised principles established by the Berlin albums, it was considered by critics to be far more direct musically and lyrically. The album's hard rock edge included conspicuous guitar contributions from Fripp, Pete Townshend, Chuck Hammer and Tom Verlaine.94 As &quot;Ashes to Ashes&quot; hit number one on the UK charts, Bowie opened a three-month run on Broadway on 24 September, starring in The Elephant Man.95
Bowie paired with Queen in 1981 for a one-off single release, &quot;Under Pressure&quot;. The duet was a hit, becoming Bowie's third UK number one single. The same year, he made a cameo appearance in the German movie Christiane F., a real-life story of teenage drug addiction in 1970s Berlin. The soundtrack, in which Bowie's music featured prominently, was released as Christiane F. a few months later. Bowie was given the lead role in the BBC's 1981 televised adaptation of Bertolt Brecht's play Baal. Coinciding with its transmission, a five-track EP of songs from the play, recorded earlier in Berlin, was released as David Bowie in Bertolt Brecht's Baal. In March 1982, the month before Paul Schrader's film Cat People came out, Bowie's title song, &quot;Cat People (Putting Out Fire)&quot;, was released as a single, becoming a minor US hit and entering the UK top 30.96
 Bowie reached a new peak of popularity and commercial success in 1983 with Let's Dance. Co-produced by Chic's Nile Rodgers, the album went platinum in both the UK and the US. Its three singles became top twenty hits in both countries, where its title track reached number one. &quot;Modern Love&quot; and &quot;China Girl&quot; made number two in the UK, accompanied by a pair of acclaimed promotional videos that, as described by biographer David Buckley, &quot;were totally absorbing and activated key archetypes in the pop world. 'Let's Dance', with its little narrative surrounding the young Aborigine couple, targeted 'youth', and 'China Girl', with its bare-bummed (and later partially-censored) beach lovemaking scene (a homage to the film From Here to Eternity), was sufficiently sexually provocative to guarantee heavy rotation on MTV. By 1983, Bowie had emerged as one of the most important video artists of the day&quot;. Let's Dance was followed by the Serious Moonlight world tour, during which Bowie was accompanied by guitarist Earl Slick and backing vocalists Frank and George Simms. The tour lasted six months and was extremely popular.97
Tonight (1984), another dance-oriented album, found Bowie collaborating with Tina Turner and, once again, Iggy Pop. It included a number of cover songs, among them the 1966 Beach Boys hit &quot;God Only Knows&quot;. The album bore the transatlantic top ten hit &quot;Blue Jean&quot;, itself the inspiration for a short film that won Bowie a Grammy Award for Best Short Form Music Video, &quot;Jazzin' for Blue Jean&quot;. Bowie performed at Wembley in 1985 for Live Aid, a multi-venue benefit concert for Ethiopian famine relief. During the event, the video for a fundraising single was premi&lt;U+00E8&gt;red, Bowie's duet with Jagger. &quot;Dancing in the Street&quot; quickly went to number one on release. The same year, Bowie worked with the Pat Metheny Group to record &quot;This Is Not America&quot; for the soundtrack of The Falcon and the Snowman. Released as a single, the song became a top 40 hit in the UK and US.98
Bowie was given a role in the 1986 film Absolute Beginners. The movie was poorly received by critics, but Bowie's theme song rose to number two in the UK charts. He also appeared as Jareth, the Goblin King, in the 1986 Jim Henson film Labyrinth, for which he wrote five songs. His final solo album of the decade was 1987's Never Let Me Down, where he ditched the light sound of his previous two albums, instead offering harder rock with an industrial/techno dance edge. Peaking at number six in the UK, the album yielded the hits &quot;Day-In, Day-Out&quot; (his 60th single), &quot;Time Will Crawl&quot;, and &quot;Never Let Me Down&quot;. Bowie later described it as his &quot;nadir&quot;, calling it &quot;an awful album&quot;.99 Supporting Never Let Me Down, and preceded by nine promotional press shows, the 86-concert Glass Spider Tour commenced on 30 May. Bowie's backing band included Peter Frampton on lead guitar. Critics maligned the tour as overproduced, saying it pandered to the current stadium rock trends in its special effects and dancing.100
1989&lt;U+2013&gt;91: Tin Machine
Bowie shelved his solo career in 1989, retreating to the relative anonymity of band membership for the first time since the early 1970s. A hard-rocking quartet, Tin Machine came into being after Bowie began to work experimentally with guitarist Reeves Gabrels. The line-up was completed by Tony and Hunt Sales, known by Bowie since the late 1970s for their contribution, on drums and bass respectively, to Iggy Pop's 1977 album Lust For Life.101
 Though he intended Tin Machine to operate as a democracy, Bowie dominated, both in songwriting and in decision-making.102 The band's album debut, Tin Machine (1989), was initially popular, though its politicised lyrics did not find universal approval: Bowie described one song as &quot;a simplistic, naive, radical, laying-it-down about the emergence of neo-Nazis&quot;; in the view of biographer Christopher Sandford, &quot;It took nerve to denounce drugs, fascism and TV [...] in terms that reached the literary level of a comic book.&quot;103 EMI complained of &quot;lyrics that preach&quot; as well as &quot;repetitive tunes&quot; and &quot;minimalist or no production&quot;.104 The album nevertheless reached number three in the UK.105 Tin Machine's first world tour was a commercial success, but there was growing reluctance&lt;U+2014&gt;among fans and critics alike&lt;U+2014&gt;to accept Bowie's presentation as merely a band member.106 A series of Tin Machine singles failed to chart, and Bowie, after a disagreement with EMI, left the label.107 Like his audience and his critics, Bowie himself became increasingly disaffected with his role as just one member of a band.108 Tin Machine began work on a second album, but Bowie put the venture on hold and made a return to solo work. Performing his early hits during the seven-month Sound+Vision Tour, he found commercial success and acclaim once again.109
In October 1990, a decade after his divorce from Angela, Bowie and Somali-born supermodel Iman were introduced by a mutual friend. Bowie recalled, &quot;I was naming the children the night we met ... it was absolutely immediate.&quot; They would marry in 1992.110 Tin Machine resumed work the same month, but their audience and critics, ultimately left disappointed by the first album, showed little interest in a second. Tin Machine II{{'}}s arrival was marked by a widely publicised and ill-timed conflict over the cover art: after production had begun, the new record label, Victory, deemed the depiction of the four nude band members in statuesque pose, judged by Bowie to be &quot;in exquisite taste&quot;, &quot;a show of wrong, obscene images&quot;, requiring air-brushing and patching to render the figures sexless.111 Tin Machine toured again, but after the live album Tin Machine Live: Oy Vey, Baby failed commercially, the band drifted apart, and Bowie, though he continued to collaborate with Gabrels, resumed his solo career.112
1992&lt;U+2013&gt;99: Electronica
 In April 1992 Bowie appeared at the Freddie Mercury Tribute Concert, following the Queen frontman's death the previous year. As well as performing &quot;Heroes&quot; and &quot;All the Young Dudes&quot;, he was joined on &quot;Under Pressure&quot; by Annie Lennox, who took Mercury's vocal part.113 Four days later, Bowie and Iman were married in Switzerland. Intending to move to Los Angeles, they flew in to search for a suitable property, but found themselves confined to their hotel, under curfew: the 1992 Los Angeles riots began the day they arrived. They settled in New York instead.114
1993 saw the release of Bowie's first solo offering since his Tin Machine departure, the soul, jazz and hip-hop influenced Black Tie White Noise. Making prominent use of electronic instruments, the album, which reunited Bowie with Let's Dance producer Nile Rodgers, confirmed Bowie's return to popularity, hitting the number one spot on the UK charts and spawning three top 40 hits, including the top 10 song &quot;Jump They Say&quot;.115 Bowie explored new directions on The Buddha of Suburbia (1993), a soundtrack album of incidental music composed for the TV series adaptation of Hanif Kureishi's novel. It contained some of the new elements introduced in Black Tie White Noise, and also signalled a move towards alternative rock. The album was a critical success but received a low-key release and only made number 87 in the UK charts.116
Reuniting Bowie with Eno, the quasi-industrial Outside (1995) was originally conceived as the first volume in a non-linear narrative of art and murder. Featuring characters from a short story written by Bowie, the album achieved US and UK chart success, and yielded three top 40 UK singles.117 In a move that provoked mixed reaction from both fans and critics, Bowie chose Nine Inch Nails as his tour partner for the Outside Tour. Visiting cities in Europe and North America between September 1995 and February the following year, the tour saw the return of Gabrels as Bowie's guitarist.118
Bowie was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame on 17 January 1996.119 Incorporating experiments in British jungle and drum 'n' bass, Earthling (1997) was a critical and commercial success in the UK and the US, and two singles from the album became UK top 40 hits. Bowie's song &quot;I'm Afraid of Americans&quot; from the Paul Verhoeven film Showgirls was re-recorded for the album, and remixed by Trent Reznor for a single release. The heavy rotation of the accompanying video, also featuring Reznor, contributed to the song's 16-week stay in the US Billboard Hot 100. The Earthling Tour took in Europe and North America between June and November 1997.120 Bowie reunited with Visconti in 1998 to record &quot;(Safe in This) Sky Life&quot; for The Rugrats Movie. Although the track was edited out of the final cut, it would later be re-recorded and released as &quot;Safe&quot; on the B-side of Bowie's 2002 single &quot;Everyone Says 'Hi'&quot;.121 The reunion led to other collaborations including a limited-edition single release version of Placebo's track &quot;Without You I'm Nothing&quot;, co-produced by Visconti, with Bowie's harmonised vocal added to the original recording.122
1999&lt;U+2013&gt;present: Neoclassicist Bowie
 Bowie created the soundtrack for Omikron, a 1999 computer game in which he and Iman also appeared as characters. Released the same year and containing re-recorded tracks from Omikron, his album 'Hours...' featured a song with lyrics by the winner of his &quot;Cyber Song Contest&quot; Internet competition, Alex Grant.123 Making extensive use of live instruments, the album was Bowie's exit from heavy electronica.124 Sessions for the planned album Toy, intended to feature new versions of some of Bowie's earliest pieces as well as three new songs, commenced in 2000, but the album was never released. Bowie and Visconti continued their collaboration, producing a new album of completely original songs instead: the result of the sessions would be the 2002 album Heathen.125 Alexandria Zahra Jones, Bowie and Iman's daughter, was born on 15 August.126
In October 2001, Bowie opened The Concert for New York City, a charity event to benefit the victims of the September 11 attacks, with a minimalist performance of Simon &amp; Garfunkel's &quot;America&quot;, followed by a full band performance of &quot;Heroes&quot;.127 2002 saw the release of Heathen, and, during the second half of the year, the Heathen Tour. Taking in Europe and North America, the tour opened at London's annual Meltdown festival, for which Bowie was that year appointed artistic director. Among the acts he selected for the festival were Phillip Glass, Television and The Polyphonic Spree. As well as songs from the new album, the tour featured material from Bowie's Low era.128 Reality (2003) followed, and then a world tour. Covering Europe, the United States, Canada, New Zealand, Australia and Japan, 'A Reality Tour', with an estimated attendance of 722,000, grossed more than any other tour in 2004. Onstage in Oslo, Norway, on 18 June, Bowie was hit in the eye with a lollipop thrown by a fan; a week later he suffered chest pain while performing at the Hurricane Festival in Schee&lt;U+00DF&gt;el, Germany. Originally thought to be a pinched nerve in his shoulder, the pain was later diagnosed as an acutely blocked artery, requiring an emergency angioplasty in Hamburg. The remaining 14 dates of the tour were cancelled.129
 Recuperating from the heart surgery, Bowie reduced his musical output for the first time in several years, making only one-off appearances on stage and in the studio. He sang in a duet of his 1972 song &quot;Changes&quot; with Butterfly Boucher for the 2004 animated film Shrek 2.130 During a relatively quiet 2005, he recorded the vocals for the song &quot;(She Can) Do That&quot;, co-written with Brian Transeau, for the movie Stealth.131 He returned to the stage on 8 September 2005, appearing with Arcade Fire for the US nationally televised event Fashion Rocks, and performed with the Canadian band for the second time a week later during the CMJ Music Marathon.132 He contributed back-up vocals on TV on the Radio's song &quot;Province&quot; for their album Return to Cookie Mountain,133 made a commercial with Snoop Dogg for XM Satellite Radio,134 and joined with Lou Reed on Danish alt-rockers Kashmir's 2005 album No Balance Palace.135
Bowie was awarded the Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award on 8 February 2006.136 In April, he announced, &quot;I&lt;U+2019&gt;m taking a year off&lt;U+2014&gt;no touring, no albums.&quot;137 He made a surprise guest appearance at David Gilmour's 29 May concert at the Royal Albert Hall in London. The event was recorded, and a selection of songs on which he had contributed joint vocals were subsequently released.138 He performed again in November, alongside Alicia Keys, at the Black Ball, a New York benefit event for Keep a Child Alive.139
Bowie was chosen to curate the 2007 High Line Festival, selecting musicians and artists for the Manhattan event,140 and performed on Scarlett Johansson's 2008 album of Tom Waits covers, Anywhere I Lay My Head.141 On the 40th anniversary of the July 1969 moon landing&lt;U+2014&gt;and Bowie's accompanying commercial breakthrough with &quot;Space Oddity&quot;&lt;U+2014&gt;EMI released the individual tracks from the original eight-track studio recording of the song, in a 2009 contest inviting members of the public to create a remix.142 A Reality Tour, a double album of live material from the 2003 concert tour, was released in January 2010.143
Acting career

Biographer David Buckley writes, &quot;The essence of Bowie's contribution to popular music can be found in his outstanding ability to analyse and select ideas from outside the mainstream—from art, literature, theatre and film—and to bring them inside, so that the currency of pop is constantly being changed.&quot;144 Buckley says &quot;Just one person took glam rock to new rarefied heights and invented character-playing in pop, marrying theatre and popular music in one seamless, powerful whole.&quot;145 Bowie's career has also been punctuated by various roles in film and theatre productions, earning him some acclaim as an actor in his own right.
The beginnings of his acting career predate his commercial breakthrough as a musician. Studying avant-garde theatre and mime under Lindsay Kemp, he was given the role of Cloud in Kemp's 1967 theatrical production Pierrot in Turquoise (later made into the 1970 TV movie The Looking Glass Murders).146 In the black and white short film The Image (1969), he played a ghostly boy who emerges from a troubled artist's painting to haunt him.147 The same year, the film of Leslie Thomas's 1966 comic novel The Virgin Soldiers saw Bowie make a brief appearance as an extra.148 In 1976 he earned acclaim for his first major film role, portraying Thomas Jerome Newton, an alien from a dying planet, in The Man Who Fell to Earth, directed by Nic Roeg. Just a Gigolo (1979), an Anglo-German co-production directed by David Hemmings, saw Bowie in the lead role as Prussian officer Paul von Pryzgodski, who, returning from World War I, is discovered by a Baroness (Marlene Dietrich) and put into her Gigolo Stable.
Bowie took the title role in the Broadway theatre production The Elephant Man, earning high praise for an expressive performance. He played the part 157 times between 1980 and 1981.149 Christiane F. &lt;U+2013&gt; Wir Kinder vom Bahnhof Zoo, a 1981 biographical film focusing on a young girl's drug addiction in West Berlin, featured Bowie in a cameo appearance as himself at a concert in Germany. Its soundtrack album, Christiane F. (1981), featured much material from his Berlin Trilogy albums.150 Bowie starred in The Hunger (1983), a revisionist vampire movie, with Catherine Deneuve and Susan Sarandon. In Nagisa Oshima's film the same year, Merry Christmas, Mr. Lawrence, based on Laurens van der Post's novel The Seed and the Sower, Bowie played Major Jack Celliers, a prisoner of war in a Japanese internment camp. Another musician, Ryuichi Sakamoto, played the camp commandant who begins to be undermined by Celliers' bizarre behaviour. Bowie had a cameo in Yellowbeard, a 1983 pirate comedy created by Monty Python members, and a small part as Colin, the hitman in the 1985 film Into the Night. He declined to play the villain Max Zorin in the James Bond film A View to a Kill (1985).151
Absolute Beginners (1986), a rock musical based on Colin MacInnes's 1959 novel about London life, featured Bowie's music and presented him with a minor acting role. The same year, Jim Henson's dark fantasy Labyrinth found him with the part of Jareth, the king of the goblins.152 Two years later he played Pontius Pilate in Martin Scorsese's 1988 film The Last Temptation of Christ. Bowie portrayed a disgruntled restaurant employee opposite Rosanna Arquette in The Linguini Incident (1991), and the mysterious FBI agent Phillip Jeffries in David Lynch's Twin Peaks: Fire Walk with Me (1992). He took a small but pivotal role as Andy Warhol in Basquiat, artist/director Julian Schnabel's 1996 biopic of Jean-Michel Basquiat, and co-starred in Giovanni Veronesi's spaghetti western Il Mio West (1998, released as Gunslinger's Revenge in the US in 2005) as the most feared gunfighter in the region.153 He played the aging gangster Bernie in Andrew Goth's Everybody Loves Sunshine (1999), and appeared in the TV horror serial of The Hunger. In Mr. Rice's Secret (2000), he played the title role as the neighbour of a terminally ill twelve-year-old, and the following year appeared as himself in Zoolander.
Bowie portrayed Nikola Tesla, the physicist who pioneered AC electricity, co-starring with Christian Bale and Hugh Jackman in The Prestige (2006), Christopher Nolan's film of Christopher Priest's epistolary novel about the bitter rivalry between two magicians in the early 20th century. He voice-acted in the animated movie Arthur and the Invisibles as the powerful villain Maltazard, and lent his voice to the character Lord Royal Highness in the SpongeBob's Atlantis SquarePantis TV movie. In the 2008 film August, directed by Austin Chick, he played a supporting role as Ogilvie, alongside Josh Hartnett and Rip Torn, with whom he had worked in 1976 for The Man Who Fell to Earth.154155
Sexual orientation
Buckley writes, &quot;If Ziggy confused both his creator and his audience, a big part of that confusion centred on the topic of sexuality.&quot;156 Bowie declared himself bisexual in an interview with Melody Maker in January 1972, a move coinciding with the first shots in his campaign for stardom as Ziggy Stardust.157 In a September 1976 interview with Playboy, Bowie said: &quot;It's true&lt;U+2014&gt;I am a bisexual. But I can't deny that I've used that fact very well. I suppose it's the best thing that ever happened to me.&quot;158
In a 1983 interview with Rolling Stone, Bowie said his public declaration of bisexuality was &quot;the biggest mistake I ever made&quot;, and on other occasions he said his interest in homosexual and bisexual culture had been more a product of the times and the situation in which he found himself than his own feelings; as described by Buckley, he said he had been driven more by &quot;a compulsion to flout moral codes than a real biological and psychological state of being&quot;.159160
Asked in 2002 by Blender whether he still believed his public declaration was the biggest mistake he ever made, he replied:

Buckley's view of the period is that Bowie, &quot;a taboo-breaker and a dabbler ... mined sexual intrigue for its ability to shock&quot;,161 and that &quot;it is probably true that Bowie was never gay, nor even consistently actively bisexual ... he did, from time to time, experiment, even if only out of a sense of curiosity and a genuine allegiance with the 'transgressional'.&quot;162 Biographer Christopher Sandford says that according to Mary Finnigan, with whom Bowie had an affair in 1969, the singer and his first wife Angie &quot;lived in a fantasy world [...] and they created their bisexual fantasy.&quot;163 Sandford tells how, during the marriage, Bowie &quot;made a positive fetish of repeating the quip that he and his wife had met while 'fucking the same bloke' [...] Gay sex was always an anecdotal and laughing matter. That Bowie's actual tastes swung the other way is clear from even a partial tally of his affairs with women.&quot;164
Musicianship
A man of many voices, Bowie, from the time of his earliest recordings in the 1960s, has employed a wide variety of musical styles. His early compositions and performances were strongly influenced not only by rock and rollers like Little Richard and Elvis Presley but also by the wider world of show business. He particularly strove to emulate the British musical theatre singer-songwriter and actor Anthony Newley, whose vocal style he frequently adopted, and made prominent use of for his 1967 debut release, David Bowie (to the disgust of Newley himself, who destroyed the copy he received from Bowie's publisher).165166 Bowie's music hall fascination continued to surface sporadically alongside such diverse styles as hard rock and heavy metal, soul, psychedelic folk and pop.167
 Musicologist James Perone observes Bowie's use of octave switches for different repetitions of the same melody, exemplified in his commercial breakthrough single, &quot;Space Oddity&quot;, and later in the song &quot;Heroes&quot;, to dramatic effect; Perone notes that &quot;in the lowest part of his vocal register [...] his voice has an almost crooner-like richness.&quot;168
Voice instructor Jo Thompson describes Bowie's vocal vibrato technique as &quot;particularly deliberate and distinctive&quot;.169 Schinder and Schwartz call him &quot;a vocalist of extraordinary technical ability, able to pitch his singing to particular effect.&quot;170 Here, too, as in his stagecraft and songwriting, the singer's chamaeleon-like nature is evident: historiographer Michael Campbell says that Bowie's lyrics &quot;arrest our ear, without question. But Bowie continually shifts from person to person as he delivers them [...] His voice changes dramatically from section to section.&quot;171
Bowie plays many instruments, among them electric, acoustic, and twelve-string guitar, alto, tenor and baritone saxophone, keyboards including piano, synthesizers and Mellotron, harmonica, Stylophone, xylophone, vibraphone, koto, drums and percussion, and string instruments including viola and cello.172173.174175
Legacy
Bowie's innovative songs and stagecraft brought a new dimension to popular music in the early 1970s, strongly influencing both its immediate forms and its subsequent development. A pioneer of glam rock, Bowie, according to music historians Schinder and Schwartz, has joint responsibility with Marc Bolan for creating the genre.176 At the same time, he inspired the innovators of the punk rock music movement&lt;U+2014&gt;historiographer Michael Campbell calls him &quot;one of punk's seminal influences&quot;. While punk musicians trashed the conventions of pop stardom, Bowie moved on again—into a more abstract style of music making that would in turn become a transforming influence. Biographer David Buckley writes, &quot;At a time when punk rock was noisily reclaiming the three-minute pop song in a show of public defiance, Bowie almost completely abandoned traditional rock instrumentation.&quot;177178 Bowie's record company sought to convey his unique status in popular music with the slogan, &quot;There is old wave, there is new wave, and there is Bowie...&quot;179 Musicologist James Perone credits him with having &quot;brought sophistication to rock music&quot;, and critical reviews frequently acknowledge the intellectual depth of his work and influence.180181182
Buckley writes that, in an early 1970s pop world that was &quot;Bloated, self-important, leather-clad, self-satisfied, [...] Bowie challenged the core belief of the rock music of its day.&quot; As described by John Peel, &quot;The one distinguishing feature about early-70s progressive rock was that it didn't progress. Before Bowie came along, people didn't want too much change.&quot; Buckley says that Bowie &quot;subverted the whole notion of what it was to be a rock star&quot;, with the result that &quot;After Bowie there has been no other pop icon of his stature, because the pop world that produces these rock gods doesn't exist any more. [...] The fierce partisanship of the cult of Bowie was also unique—its influence lasted longer and has been more creative than perhaps almost any other force within pop fandom.&quot; Buckley concludes that &quot;Bowie is both star and icon. The vast body of work he has produced [...] has created perhaps the biggest cult in popular culture. [...] His influence has been unique in popular culture—he has permeated and altered more lives than any comparable figure.&quot;183
Bowie was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 1996.184 Through perpetual reinvention, he has seen his influence continue to broaden and extend: music reviewer Brad Filicky writes that over the decades, &quot;Bowie has become known as a musical chameleon, changing and dictating trends as much as he has altered his style to fit&quot;, influencing fashion and pop culture to a degree &quot;second only to Madonna&quot;.185 Biographer Thomas Forget adds, &quot;Because he has succeeded in so many different styles of music, it is almost impossible to find a popular artist today that has not been influenced by David Bowie.&quot;186
Discography


David Bowie (1967)
Space Oddity (1969)
The Man Who Sold the World (1970)
Hunky Dory (1971)
The Rise and Fall of Ziggy Stardust and the Spiders from Mars (1972)
Aladdin Sane (1973)
Pin Ups (1973)
Diamond Dogs (1974)
Young Americans (1975)
Station to Station (1976)
Low (1977)
&quot;Heroes&quot; (1977)
Lodger (1979)
Scary Monsters (and Super Creeps) (1980)
Let's Dance (1983)
Tonight (1984)
Never Let Me Down (1987)
Black Tie White Noise (1993)
The Buddha of Suburbia (1993)
Outside (1995)
Earthling (1997)
'Hours...' (1999)
Heathen (2002)
Reality (2003)

Filmography

Awards and recognition

Bowie's 1969 commercial breakthrough, the song &quot;Space Oddity&quot;, won him an Ivor Novello Special Award For Originality.187 For his performance in the 1976 science fiction film The Man Who Fell to Earth, he won a Saturn Award for Best Actor.188 In the ensuing decades he has been honoured with numerous awards for his music and its accompanying videos, receiving, among others, two Grammy Awards189190 and two BRIT Awards.191
In 1999, Bowie was made a Commander of the Ordre des Arts et des Lettres by the French government.192 He received an honorary doctorate from Berklee College of Music the same year.193 He declined the British honour Commander of the British Empire in 2000, and a knighthood in 2003.194
Throughout his career he has sold an estimated 136 million albums.195 In the United Kingdom, he has been awarded 9 Platinum, 11 Gold and 8 Silver albums, and in the United States, 5 Platinum and 7 Gold.196197 In the BBC's 2002 poll of the 100 Greatest Britons, he was ranked 29.198 In 2004, Rolling Stone magazine ranked him 39th on their list of the 100 Greatest Rock Artists of All Time199 and the 23rd best singer of all time.200
Bowie was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame on 17 January 1996.201
See also


100 Greatest Britons
Best selling music artists
List of artists who reached number one on the Hot 100 (US)
List of artists who reached number one on the US Dance chart
List of David Bowie tours
List of number-one hits (United States)
List of Number 1 Dance Hits (United States)
List of people who have declined a British honour
Low Symphony and Heroes Symphony

Notes

References













Further reading

Seabrook, Thomas Jerome, Bowie in Berlin: A New Career in a New Town, Jawbone Press, 2008.
Spitz, Marc, Bowie: A Biography, Crown Publishers, 2009.
Tremlett, George, David Bowie: Living on the Brink, Carroll and Graf, 1997.
Waldrep, Shelton, &quot;Phenomenology of Performance,&quot; The Aesthetics of Self-Invention: Oscar Wilde to David Bowie, University of Minnesota Press, 2004.
Welch, Chris, David Bowie: We Could Be Heroes: The Stories Behind Every David Bowie Song, Da Capo Press, 1999.
Wilcken, Hugo, 33&lt;U+2153&gt;: David Bowie's Low, Continuum, 2005.

External links



Official David Bowie website
Official David Bowie Myspace Page
Official David Bowie YouTube Channel
Bowie Art Work &lt;U+2013&gt; Paintings, Printmakings, etc.




Charlie Rose interview (1998)








az:Devid Boui bs:David Bowie br:David Bowie bg:&lt;U+0414&gt;&lt;U+0435&gt;&lt;U+0439&gt;&lt;U+0432&gt;&lt;U+0438&gt;&lt;U+0434&gt; &lt;U+0411&gt;&lt;U+043E&gt;&lt;U+0443&gt;&lt;U+0438&gt; ca:David Bowie cs:David Bowie cy:David Bowie da:David Bowie de:David Bowie et:David Bowie es:David Bowie eo:David Bowie fa:&lt;U+062F&gt;&lt;U+06CC&gt;&lt;U+0648&gt;&lt;U+06CC&gt;&lt;U+062F&gt; &lt;U+0628&gt;&lt;U+0648&gt;&lt;U+06CC&gt;&lt;U+06CC&gt; fr:David Bowie ga:David Bowie gl:David Bowie ko:&lt;U+B370&gt;&lt;U+C774&gt;&lt;U+BE44&gt;&lt;U+B4DC&gt; &lt;U+BCF4&gt;&lt;U+C704&gt; hr:David Bowie io:David Bowie id:David Bowie is:David Bowie it:David Bowie he:&lt;U+05D3&gt;&lt;U+05D9&gt;&lt;U+05D9&gt;&lt;U+05D5&gt;&lt;U+05D5&gt;&lt;U+05D9&gt;&lt;U+05D3&gt; &lt;U+05D1&gt;&lt;U+05D5&gt;&lt;U+05D0&gt;&lt;U+05D9&gt; ka:&lt;U+10D3&gt;&lt;U+10D4&gt;&lt;U+10D5&gt;&lt;U+10D8&gt;&lt;U+10D3&gt; &lt;U+10D1&gt;&lt;U+10DD&gt;&lt;U+10E3&gt;&lt;U+10D8&gt; lv:Deivids Bovijs lt:David Bowie li:David Bowie hu:David Bowie nl:David Bowie ja:&lt;U+30C7&gt;&lt;U+30F4&gt;&lt;U+30A3&gt;&lt;U+30C3&gt;&lt;U+30C9&gt;&lt;U+30FB&gt;&lt;U+30DC&gt;&lt;U+30A6&gt;&lt;U+30A4&gt; no:David Bowie nn:David Bowie oc:David Bowie uz:David Bowie pms:David Bowie pl:David Bowie pt:David Bowie ro:David Bowie ru:&lt;U+0411&gt;&lt;U+043E&gt;&lt;U+0443&gt;&lt;U+0438&gt;, &lt;U+0414&gt;&lt;U+044D&gt;&lt;U+0432&gt;&lt;U+0438&gt;&lt;U+0434&gt; sq:David Bowie scn:David Bowie simple:David Bowie sk:David Bowie sl:David Bowie sr:&lt;U+0414&gt;&lt;U+0435&gt;&lt;U+0458&gt;&lt;U+0432&gt;&lt;U+0438&gt;&lt;U+0434&gt; &lt;U+0411&gt;&lt;U+043E&gt;&lt;U+0443&gt;&lt;U+0438&gt; sh:David Bowie fi:David Bowie sv:David Bowie te:&lt;U+0C21&gt;&lt;U+0C47&gt;&lt;U+0C35&gt;&lt;U+0C3F&gt;&lt;U+0C21&gt;&lt;U+0C4D&gt; &lt;U+0C2C&gt;&lt;U+0C4C&gt;&lt;U+0C35&gt;&lt;U+0C40&gt; th:&lt;U+0E40&gt;&lt;U+0E14&gt;&lt;U+0E27&gt;&lt;U+0E34&gt;&lt;U+0E14&gt; &lt;U+0E42&gt;&lt;U+0E1A&gt;&lt;U+0E27&gt;&lt;U+0E35&gt; tr:David Bowie uk:&lt;U+0414&gt;&lt;U+0435&gt;&lt;U+0432&gt;&lt;U+0456&gt;&lt;U+0434&gt; &lt;U+0411&gt;&lt;U+043E&gt;&lt;U+0443&gt;&lt;U+0457&gt; vi:David Bowie vls:David Bowie zh-yue:&lt;U+5927&gt;&lt;U+885B&gt;&lt;U+5BF6&gt;&lt;U+5152&gt; zh:&lt;U+5927&gt;&lt;U+536B&gt;&lt;U+00B7&gt;&lt;U+9C8D&gt;&lt;U+4F0A&gt;
Category:1947 births Category:Living people Category:1960s singers Category:1970s singers Category:1980s singers Category:1990s singers Category:2000s singers Category:2010s singers Category:Bisexual actors Category:Bisexual musicians Category:BRIT Award winners Category:British expatriates in Switzerland Category:Columbia Records artists Category:Commandeurs of the Ordre des Arts et des Lettres * Category:Daytime Emmy Award winners Category:Decca Records artists Category:English baritones Category:English film actors Category:English male singers Category:English multi-instrumentalists Category:English people of Irish descent Category:English record producers Category:English rock musicians Category:English singer-songwriters Category:Glam rock Category:Grammy Award winners Category:Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award winners Category:Ivor Novello Award winners Category:LGBT musicians from the United Kingdom Category:LGBT people from England Category:MTV Video Music Awards winners Category:MTV Video Vanguard Award winners Category:Musicians from London Category:Parlophone artists Category:People from Brixton Category:RCA Victor artists Category:Rock and Roll Hall of Fame inductees&lt;U+200E&gt; Category:Rykodisc artists Category:Saturn Award winners Category:Virgin Records artists



↩


↩
Sandford (1997): pp. 9&lt;U+2013&gt;16↩
Sandford (1997): pp. 18&lt;U+2013&gt;19↩

Buckley (2000): p. 21.↩

↩
Sandford (1997): pp. 19&lt;U+2013&gt;20↩


Sandford (1997): p. 25↩
↩
Buckley (2005): p.19↩
Sandford (1997): p. 28↩
Sandford (1997): pp. 29&lt;U+2013&gt;30↩

Sandford (1997): pp. 35&lt;U+2013&gt;39↩
Buckley (2000): p. 33↩

Buckley (2005): pp. 41&lt;U+2013&gt;42↩

Buckley (2005): p. 46↩
Buckley (2005): pp. 49&lt;U+2013&gt;52↩
Sandford (1997): pp. 49&lt;U+2013&gt;50↩

Sandford (1997): p. 53↩

↩
Sandford (1997): p. 60↩
Sandford (1997): pp. 54&lt;U+2013&gt;60↩

Sandford (1997): pp. 62&lt;U+2013&gt;63↩

Sandford (1997): p. 67↩

Sandford (1997): pp. 73&lt;U+2013&gt;74↩
Pegg (2000): pp. 260&lt;U+2013&gt;65↩


Buckley (2005): pp. 95&lt;U+2013&gt;99↩
Sandford (1997): p. 80↩
Sandford (1997): pp. 85&lt;U+2013&gt;86↩


Buckley (2005): pp. 135&lt;U+2013&gt;36↩
Sandford (1997): pp. 93&lt;U+2013&gt;95↩
Buckley (2000): p. 156↩
Pegg (2004): pp. 281&lt;U+2013&gt;83↩
Sandford (1997): p. 108↩
Sandford (1997): pp. 106&lt;U+2013&gt;7↩
Carr &amp; Murray (1981): p. 7↩
Carr &amp; Murray (1981): p. 116↩
Buckley (2005): p. 163↩
Sandford (1997): p. 115↩
Buckley (2005): p. 3↩
Buckley (2005): pp. 180&lt;U+2013&gt;83↩
Buckley (2005): pp. 204&lt;U+2013&gt;5↩
Sandford (1997): p. 128↩
Sandford (1997): p. 138↩
Carr &amp; Murray (1981): pp. 68&lt;U+2013&gt;74↩
Sandford (1997): p. 146↩
↩
Sandford (1997): pp. 135&lt;U+2013&gt;36↩

Sandford (1997): pp. 137, 153↩
Buckley (2005): p. 238↩
Buckley (2005): p. 244↩


Buckley (2000): pp. 289&lt;U+2013&gt;91.↩
↩
Carr &amp; Murray (1981): p. 11.↩
Sandford (1997): p. 158↩
Buckley (2005): p. 252↩
Sandford (1997): pp. 154–55↩
Sandford (1997): p. 149↩
↩
Sandford (1997): pp. 166&lt;U+2013&gt;68↩
Perone (2007): p. 175↩
Thomson (1993): p. xiii↩
Pegg (2000): pp. 90&lt;U+2013&gt;92↩
Sandford (1997): pp. 181&lt;U+2013&gt;82↩
↩
Buckley (2005): p. 293↩
Sandford (1997): p. 189↩
Carr &amp; Murray (1981): pp. 102&lt;U+2013&gt;7↩
Buckley (2005): p. 281↩
Sandford (1997): pp. 191&lt;U+2013&gt;92↩
Sandford (1997): p. 197↩
Pegg (2000): p. 29↩
Carr &amp; Murray (1981): pp. 108&lt;U+2013&gt;14↩
Sandford (1997): pp. 205&lt;U+2013&gt;7↩
Sandford (1997): pp. 208, 211&lt;U+2013&gt;12↩
Buckley (2005): pp. 335&lt;U+2013&gt;55↩
Buckley (2005): pp. 165&lt;U+2013&gt;66↩
↩
↩
Buckley (2005): p. 387↩
Sandford (1997): p. 274↩
Sandford (1997): p. 275↩
Sandford (1997): p. 273↩

Buckley (2005): p. 394↩
Sandford (1997): pp. 278&lt;U+2013&gt;79↩
Sandford (1997): p. 278↩
Sandford (1997): pp. 280&lt;U+2013&gt;86↩
Sandford (1997): p. 289↩
Sandford (1997): p. 292↩
Sandford (1997): pp. 294&lt;U+2013&gt;95↩
Sandford (1997): pp. 298&lt;U+2013&gt;99↩
Buckley (2005): pp. 413–14↩
Sandford (1997): pp. 301&lt;U+2013&gt;8↩
Buckley (2000): pp. 494&lt;U+2013&gt;95, 623↩
Buckley (2000): pp. 623&lt;U+2013&gt;24↩
Buckley (2000): pp. 512&lt;U+2013&gt;13↩
↩
Buckley (2000): pp. 533&lt;U+2013&gt;34↩
Thompson (2006): p. 203↩
Thompson (2006): pp. 203, 212↩
Buckley (2005): p. 466↩
Perone (2007): p. 125↩
Buckley (2005): pp. 488&lt;U+2013&gt;89↩
Buckley (2005): p. 485↩
Buckley (2005): p. 491↩
Buckley (2005): pp. 493&lt;U+2013&gt;95↩
Buckley (2005): pp. 504&lt;U+2013&gt;5↩
Buckley (2004): p. 16↩
Perone (2007): p. 142↩
Thompson (2006): pp. 291&lt;U+2013&gt;92↩
↩
↩
↩
Thompson (2006): p. 293↩
↩
↩
↩
Schinder &amp; Schwartz (2007): p. 500↩
↩
↩
↩
Buckley (2005): p. 526↩
Buckley (2005): p. 2↩
Sandford (1997): p. 43↩
Buckley (2005): p. 49↩


Sandford (1997); p. 208↩
Pegg (2004) p. 561.↩
Sandford (1997): pp. 252&lt;U+2013&gt;53↩
Thompson (2006): p. 195↩
↩
↩
Buckley (2005): p. 140↩

↩
Buckley (2000): p. 401↩
Buckley (2005): p. 106↩
Buckley (2005): p. 141↩
Buckley (2005): p. 147↩
Sandford (1997): p. 48↩

Sandford (1997): pp. 41&lt;U+2013&gt;42↩
Perone (2007): p. 4↩
Perone (2007): pp. 22, 36&lt;U+2013&gt;37↩
Perone (2007) p. 12↩
↩
Schinder &amp; Schwartz (2007): p. 483↩
Campbell (2008): p. 254↩
Thompson (2006): p. 346↩
↩
Perone (2007): pp. 17&lt;U+2013&gt;44, 152&lt;U+2013&gt;60↩
Buckley (2004): p. 48↩
Schinder &amp; Schwartz (2007): p. 482↩
Campbell (2008) p. 304↩
Buckley (2004): p. 45↩
Thomson (1993): p. 217↩

Perone (2007): p. 183↩
↩
Buckley (2005): pp. 516–17, 524, 529↩

↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩

↩
↩
↩
↩
↩



