
   The British Rail Class 334 is a suburban electric multiple unit built by Alstom in Birmingham. They are part of the Juniper family of trains along with Classes 458 and 460. They were built for SPT/First ScotRail outer suburban services in Glasgow, UK. Their introduction saw the withdrawal of the last of Glasgow's venerable Class 303 &quot;Blue Train&quot; sets which had been in service since 1960.
Although delivered to Strathclyde in 2000, they did not enter passenger service until 2002 due to a large number of teething problems (in common with other Juniper-based classes) and technical failures which plagued the new units at their introduction.
SPT purchased a total of 40 units, which can be seen in use daily across the SPT electric network. They are most commonly seen on the Argyle Line, but they are also a common sight on the Ayrshire and Inverclyde lines. They are less common on the Cathcart Circle Lines, which are served mainly by the aging Class 314 units, and the North Clyde Line, which is served mainly by Class 320 units. On the North Clyde Line, the trains mainly run in 6-car formation (two 3-car units) on weekday mornings, and 3-car services terminating at High Street on Saturdays.
The new Larkhall line opened in December 2005. SPT had ordered 38 Juniper units originally, but two were added to the order as a goodwill gesture due to teething problems. Additional units are to be ordered for several new routes in Scotland (Airdrie-Bathgate Rail Link &amp; GARL), however they will not be Class 334s.
It is rumoured that the Class 334 units are to be removed from the majority of Ayrshire and Inverclyde services during 2008, to be replaced by Class 318 units, due to Class 318 units having more seats than the Class 334 units. It is then expected that the Class 334s will operate North Clyde Line services (extended to Edinburgh via A2B link) and Argyle Line services, allowing the remaining class 320 trains to be cascaded to the Cathcart Circle lines, which will ultimately result in the full withdrawal of the ageing Class 314 fleet.
Class 334 trains are apparently scheduled to be undergoing a refurbishment in the near future.
Announcement systems
In line with other SPT electric units (classes 318 and 320), the 334s are fitted with automatic announcement systems. These originally featured the voice of a woman with a strong Glasgow (Glaswegian) accent who was much criticised by commuters, and nicknamed &quot;Annoying Annie&quot;, but has since been replaced by the voice of Scottish actress Fletcher Mathers. In March 2006, to coincide with the Scottish legislation banning smoking in public places, the Passenger Information Systems (PIS) were updated to inform customers of the ban at stations where public buildings are in use. This notice has subsequently been removed, but now an occasional announcement appears reminding passengers that all accommodation is non-smoking.
The format of the announcement systems are as follows:
Approaching station: We are now approaching X. Please mind the gap when alighting from this train.
Approaching Interchange station: We are now approaching Y. Change here for stations to A, Stations to B and for the Subway. Please mind the gap when alighting from this train.
At station. This is X, this train is for Y, the next stop is Z.
At second-last station. This is X. The next stop is Y, where this train will terminate.
At terminated station. This is Y, where this train will terminate. Please ensure that you take your luggage and personal belongings with you when leaving the train.
When a service normally operated by a 6-car set is replaced with a 3 car set. We wish to apologise for the lack of accommodation on this train today. This is due to a shortage of rolling stock.
No Smoking announcement. Please note that all services are fully non smoking. Thank you for your co-operation.
The announcement system is well known to be unreliable.  The announcements often get out of sync with the train's location and First ScotRail's regular amendments to the information system usually lead to more errors and incorrect interchange information. Although reliability is improving, many problems are still encountered which can cause confusion for passengers who do not know the line well. 
Accidents
On February 25th 2007, 334 025 struck a Network Rail van on Gailes level crossing while running ECS from Ardrossan South Beach to Ayr Townhead CS. 334025 sustained damage to its solebar and was taken by road to Wolverton works for repairs in May 2007. The repairs lasted for 7 months and all three cars in the set are now back at Shields T.M.D. (Traction maintenance depot) In Pollokshields, Glasgow.
On January 16th 2008, 334 017 was involved in a minor collision whilst entering Glasgow Central Station. The unit was working the 08:24 passenger service from Gourock when it collided with an empty Class 318 train (318 267) whilst preparing to terminate at Glasgow Central. The train was in the process of braking and was travelling at less than 4mph when the collision occurred. Four passengers were slightly injured; however only one required hospital attention, and was transferred to Glasgow Southern General hospital in a taxi. The unit sustained no damage during the collision.


pl:British Rail Class 334
334
