
The Moore School of business is the business school of University of South Carolina in Columbia, South Carolina, United States. The university founded the Moore School in 1919 and it has shown strong performance by ranking publications in international business. It currently enrolls over 3,700 students in degree-seeking programs. These programs include bachelor, masters and doctorate degrees.
History
The University of South Carolina began efforts to open a school of commerce as early as 1914. USC founded the school in 1919 and dean George Olson firmly established the school by the early 1920s. The school grew with the university. In 1958, the school established the Masters of Business Administration program. By 1963, AACSB gave the school full accreditation.
 The Professional Masters of Business Administration (PMBA, but then called MBA-ETV) started in 1970. The PMBA program allows people in South Carolina to receive an MBA by taking part-time classes at remote locations and over the internet. Then in 1974 the school established its Masters of International Business (MIBS). National publications hold the program in high esteem and the program continuously garners high rankings in international business.
In 1998, Wall Street financier and USC graduate Darla Moore donated $25 million to the business school. In her honor the school was renamed Darla Moore School of Business. The first name was dropped shortly thereafter and the school is now officially called The Moore School of Business.
In 2001 Joel A. Smith III, a former Bank of America Executive was appointed to be the dean of the Moore School.
The school combined its MIBS and MBA programs to form the IMBA program in 2002. The same year, the school started offering a specialization in international business for undergraduate students as a major.
On April 23, 2004 the Business School announced another gift by Darla Moore. She donated $45 million with the challenge to the University to match that sum. The funds are dedicated to a complete renovation of the Hipp-Close building and to increase the school's endowment.
Today approximately 3,000 students learn at the MSB, making it the second largest college at the University of South Carolina. Over 2,500 are enrolled in undergraduate programs and almost 500 students are working on their graduate degree.1
Facilities
The eight-story, 408,000-square-foot (37,904 sq. meters) complex of H. William Close and Francis M. Hipp buildings contain The Moore School of Business. The offices for all of the academic departments are housed in the school, as well as the administration, development, alumni, executive program, and career offices.
The Elliott White Springs Library, located on the second floor of the Francis M. Hipp buildings contains specialized holdings in the fields of business and economics.2 These holding include: reference materials, periodicals, books, and annual reports. Also located in the library are the reserve materials for all business and economics courses. In addition to these print sources, the Business library offers access to computer based information through an online search service and in the form of CD/ROM based systems.3
Academics
Rank and reputation
U.S. News &amp; World Report in its August 2006 annual survey &quot;America&lt;U+2019&gt;s Best Colleges Guide&quot; ranked the Moore School&lt;U+2019&gt;s undergraduate studies 42nd in the US. In the specialty of international business, the publication ranked the school 1st in the US, a position the school has held for ten years. 45
In postgraduate studies, the Moore school has also received several worldwide rankings. On January 29, 2007, The Financial Times of London ranked Moore's MBA-level programs 72nd among the top 100 programs. Moore School is included in the top 100 of the Economist Intelligence Unit's MBA Rankings. The Wall Street Journal&lt;U+2019&gt;s annual rankings of top business schools placed the school #7 for the quality of its international business program. 678
On the national level, the Moore School of Business was ranked #2 in the international business specialty by U.S. News &amp; World Report in its reputational survey of &quot;America's Best Graduate Schools&quot; in spring of 2007. The Moore School has been ranked in the top 2 for 18 consecutive years. Overall, the publication ranked the school #55 in the US in graduate business education.910
Programs
Undergraduate

Accounting
Finance
Insurance and Risk Management
International Business
Management

Entrepreneurship
Human Resources

Marketing
Management Information Systems
Real Estate

Graduate

International MBA (IMBA)
Professional MBA (PMBA)
Executive International MBA (EIMBA)
Master of Accountancy
Master of Arts in Economics
Master of Human Resources
Master of Taxation

International MBA
The International Masters of Administration at the Moore School combines traditional business education with intensive language training in one of eight languages &lt;U+2013&gt; Arabic, Chinese, French, German, Italian, Japanese, Portuguese, or Spanish. In addition to the language tracks, the global track allows students to study the business and cultural issues of regions around the world without learning a language other than English. All tracks are 20-22 months, with the exception of Chinese and Japanese, which require 29-34 months of study to give students added exposure to the more complex languages and cultures of these countries.
Students begin the program with an intensive core of business courses. The core last from July to December. In January, students begin language training in the country that natively speaks the language they are learning. Then around May 1, students begin a mandatory internship, usually in the language they studied.
After their internships are completed, students in both the language and global tracks return to the Moore School of Business to continue their business education. Students take elective classes during their final two semesters either at USC or they may choose to complete a one-semester exchange.11
Doctorate

Ph.D. in Business Administration
Ph.D. in Economics

Student organizations

American Marketing Association
Beta Alpha Psi
Beta Gamma Sigma
Business Student Council
Delta Sigma Pi
Financial Management Association
Gamma Iota Sigma
Marketing Scholars
Society of Human Resource Management (SHRM)
Global Business Council

Noted faculty

Jeffrey S. Arpan, D.B.A.D.
Timothy W. Koch, Ph.D.
Gregory R. Niehaus, Ph.D.
Rodney L. Roenfeldt, D.B.A.
Kendall Roth, Ph.D.

External links

Moore School of Business Official Website
International MBA
Overview from AACSB


References and Notes

Category:Business schools in the United States Category:University of South Carolina



Moore School of Business Historical Highlights↩
http://www.sc.edu/library/pubserv/business.html↩
USC Building Information Page on the Hipp-Close Building↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
Prospective Student Web Site↩


