
The National Mall is an open-area national park in downtown Washington, D.C., the capital of the United States. The National Mall is a unit of the National Park Service, and is administered by the National Mall and Memorial Parks unit.1 The term &quot;National Mall&quot; commonly includes areas that are officially part of West Potomac Park and Constitution Gardens to the west, and often is taken to refer to the entire area between the Lincoln Memorial and the Capitol, with the Washington Monument providing a division slightly west of the center. The National Mall receives approximately 24 million visitors each year.2
History

 The idea for the National Mall was originally conceived by Pierre Charles L'Enfant in his plans for the city of Washington, D.C., created in 1791. However, his ideas were not realized until the beginning of the 20th century, with the McMillan Commission plan, which was also inspired by the City Beautiful Movement. Among other things, the McMillan plan called for moving the main railroad station from a site on the National Mall to its present location at Union Station.
On October 15, 1966, the National Mall was added to the National Register of Historic Places. In 2003, the United States Congress passed the Reserve Act to restrict further construction on the National Mall.3
Dimensions


From the Capitol steps to the Lincoln Memorial, the Mall runs 1.9 miles (3.0 km).
From the steps to the Washington Monument, the Mall spans 1.2 miles (1.8 km).
From Ulysses S. Grant Memorial to Lincoln Memorial, the Mall covers 309.2 acres (125.13 ha).

Landmarks



1. Washington Monument
2. National Museum of American History
3. National Museum of Natural History
4. National Gallery of Art Sculpture Garden
5. West Building of the National Gallery of Art
6. East Building of the National Gallery of Art

 
7. United States Capitol
8. Ulysses S. Grant Memorial
9. United States Botanic Garden
10. National Museum of the American Indian
11. National Air and Space Museum
12. Hirshhorn Museum and Sculpture Garden

 
13. Arts and Industries Building
14. Smithsonian Institution Building
15. Freer Gallery of Art
16. Arthur M. Sackler Gallery
17. National Museum of African Art





This USGS satellite image of the National Mall (proper) was taken April 26, 2002. The Capitol and surrounding grounds on the right were pixelated before release, presumably for security reasons.

The National Sylvan Theater, southeast of the Washington Monument, is also part of the Mall, although it is not numbered on the above image. As popularly understood, the National Mall also includes the following areas west of the Washington Monument: the Lincoln Memorial and Reflecting Pool, the National World War II Memorial, the Korean War Veterans Memorial, the Vietnam Veterans Memorial, and the District of Columbia War Memorial.
The Martin Luther King, Jr. National Memorial, scheduled for completion in 2009, will be located on a 4 acre (1.62 ha) site that borders the Tidal Basin and within the sightline of the Jefferson and Lincoln memorials.
The National Museum of African American History and Culture will be located at the southwest corner of Constitution Avenue and 14th Street, Northwest, adjacent to the National Museum of American History.
Other nearby attractions
  Other attractions within walking distance of the National Mall include the Library of Congress and the United States Supreme Court Building east of the Capitol; the White House (on a line directly north of the Washington Monument), the National Archives, the Old Post Office Pavilion, the National Theatre, Ford's Theatre, and the Albert Einstein Memorial to the north; the National Postal Museum, and Union Station to the northeast; and the Jefferson Memorial, the Franklin Delano Roosevelt Memorial, the George Mason Memorial, the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum, and the Bureau of Engraving and Printing to the south.
Usage of the National Mall
The National Mall, in combination with the other attractions in the Washington Metropolitan Area, makes the nation's capital city one of the most popular tourist destinations in the country. But it has uses other than as a tourist focal point.
Protests and rallies
  The National Mall's status as a wide, open expanse at the heart of the capital makes it an attractive site for protests and rallies of all types. One notable example is the 1963 March on Washington for Jobs and Freedom, a political rally for African American civil rights, at which Martin Luther King, Jr. gave his famous &quot;I Have a Dream&quot; speech.
The largest officially recorded rally was the Vietnam War Moratorium Rally on October 15, 1969. Although larger rallies may have occurred since that time, the United States Park Police no longer releases official estimates of crowd sizes on the Mall. One later rally that is claimed to have been the largest rally on the Mall was the 2004 March for Women's Lives. On January 27, 2007, tens of thousands of protesters opposed to the Iraq War, converged on the Mall, drawing comparisons by participants to the Vietnam War protest.4567
Presidential inauguration
  During the presidential inauguration, people without official tickets gather at the National Mall. Normally, the Mall between 7th and 14th Streets, NW is used as a staging ground for the parade.8
On December 4, 2008, the Presidential Inaugural Committee announced that &quot;for the first time, the entire length of the National Mall will be opened to the public so that more people than ever before will be able to witness the swearing-in of the President from a vantage point in sight of the Capitol.&quot;9 This arrangement was made because of the massive turnout &lt;U+2013&gt; projected to be as many 2 million people &lt;U+2013&gt; expected for the inauguration of Barack Obama.
Recreation
The National Mall has long served as a spot for jogging, picnics, and light recreation for the Washington population. It is also host to several annual events. Every year on July 4th, A Capitol Fourth celebration takes place at the U.S. Capitol end of the Mall, with a fireworks display. On Monday nights during July and August, the Mall hosts the annual Screen on the Green movie festival. The free classic movies are projected on large portable screens and typically draw crowds of thousands of people.
On July 7, 2007, one leg of Live Earth was held at the Mall. Former Vice President Al Gore presented, and artists such as Garth Brooks and Trisha Yearwood performed.
Transportation
  The National Mall is accessible via Washington Metro, with the Smithsonian station located on the south side of the Mall, near the Smithsonian Institution Building, and between the Washington Monument and Capitol. The Federal Triangle, Archives&lt;U+2013&gt;Navy Memorial&lt;U+2013&gt;Penn Quarter, and Union Station Metro stations are also located near the Mall, to the north. L'Enfant Plaza, Federal Center Southwest and Capitol South Metro stations are located a few blocks south of the Mall.
Metrobus and the DC Circulator make scheduled stops around the National Mall. Parking is also available south of the Mall, accessible directly south of the Lincoln Memorial.
See also


National Register of Historic Places listings in the District of Columbia
Operation Fast Forward

References

External links


Official site of the National Mall National Park Service
Official site for the National Mall Plan National Park Service
Official site of the Trust for the National Mall Non-profit partner of the National Park Service




ca:National Mall de:National Mall es:National Mall fr:National Mall fy:National Mall it:National Mall he:&lt;U+05D4&gt;&lt;U+05DE&gt;&lt;U+05D5&gt;&lt;U+05DC&gt; hu:National Mall nl:National Mall ja:&lt;U+30CA&gt;&lt;U+30B7&gt;&lt;U+30E7&gt;&lt;U+30CA&gt;&lt;U+30EB&gt;&lt;U+30FB&gt;&lt;U+30E2&gt;&lt;U+30FC&gt;&lt;U+30EB&gt; no:National Mall pl:National Mall pt:National Mall simple:National Mall sv:National Mall zh:&lt;U+56FD&gt;&lt;U+5BB6&gt;&lt;U+5E7F&gt;&lt;U+573A&gt;
  Category:Art gallery places Category:Landmarks in Washington, D.C. Category:Museum places Category:National parks in Washington, D.C. Category:National Register of Historic Places in Washington, D.C. Category:Pedestrian malls



National Mall &amp; Memorial Parks - National Mall &amp; Memorial Parks (U.S. National Park Service)↩
U.S. National Park Service↩
Park Service Seeks Ideas for a Mall Makeover, The Washington Post↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩


