 The Royal Gold Cup or Saint Agnes Cup is a solid gold covered cup lavishly decorated with enamel and pearls. It was made for the French royal family at the end of the 14th century, and later belonged to several English monarchs, before spending nearly 300 years in Spain. It is now in the British Museum, and generally agreed to be the outstanding survival of late medieval French plate. It has been described as &quot;the one surviving royal magnificence of the International Gothic age&quot;.1
Description
The cup is made of solid gold, and stands 23.6 cm high, with a diameter of 17.8 cm at its widest point;2 it weighs four pounds and 4.25 ounces.3 It has a cover that lifts off, and once stood on a triangular stand, now lost. The stem of the cup has twice been extended by the addition of cylindrical bands, so that it was originally a good deal shorter.4 The original decorated knop or finial on the cover has been lost, and a strip decorated with 36 pearls has been lost from the outer edge of the cover; presumably it was similar to the one still in place round the foot of the cup. A strip of gold with jagged edges can be seen where it was removed.5
The gold surfaces are decorated with scenes in basse-taille enamel using a technique that gives translucent colours that reflect back light from the gold beneath; many background areas of gold have engraved and pointill&lt;U+00E9&gt; decoration worked in the gold. In particular the decoration features large areas of translucent red, which have survived in excellent condition. This colour, known as rouge clair, was the most difficult to achieve technically, and highly prized for this and the brilliance of the colour when it was done successfully.6 Scenes from the life of Saint Agnes, described in detail below, go round the top of the cover and the sloping underside of the main body. The symbols of the Four Evangelists run round the foot of the cup, and there are enamel medallions at the centre of the inside of both the cup and the cover. The lower of the two added bands contains enamel Tudor roses on a diapered pointill&lt;U+00E9&gt; background; this was apparently added under Henry VIII. The upper band has an engraved inscription filled in with black enamel, with a barrier of laurel branches in green to mark off the end of the inscription from its beginning.7
The cup came to the British Museum with a custom-made hexagonal case of leather on a wood frame, with iron lock, handles and mounts. This was either made at the same time or soon after the cup, and has incised and stamped foliate decoration and a blackletter inscription: &quot;YHE.SUS.O.MARYA.O.MARYA YHE SUS&quot;.8
Provenance
 There is no firm evidence as to the date and circumstances of the creation of the cup, which will be covered below. The cup is first clearly documented in an inventory from 1391 of the valuables belonging to Charles VI of France (reigned 1380-1422), surviving in two copies in the Biblioth&lt;U+00E8&gt;que nationale de France.9 This lists:

A hanap of gold, all its cover well and richly enamelled on the outside with the life of Madame St Agnes; and the cresting of the foot is garnished with 26 pearls, and the crown around the cover with 36 pearls; and the finial of the said cover (is) garnished with four sapphires, three balas rubies and fifteen pearls. And it weighs 9 marcs 3 ounces of gold. and the said hanap rests on a stand of gold in the form of a tripod, and in the middle of the tripod is represented Our Lord in a sun on a ground of clear red, and the three feet of the tripod are formed by three winged dragons. The said hanap and cover were given to the king by monseigneur the duc de Berry on his journey into Touraine in the year 91.&quot;10

Jean, duc de Berry (1340 &lt;U+2013&gt; 1416) was Charles VI's uncle, and a powerful figure in the kingdom, as well as the most famous and extravagant collector and commissioner of art of his day. He is still best known for commissioning the Tr&lt;U+00E8&gt;s Riches Heures du Duc de Berry, the famous International Gothic illuminated manuscript, and also commissioned the Holy Thorn Reliquary, now in the British Museum.11 His meeting with Charles in 1391 saw reconciliation between the two after a period of bad relations; the young king had been forced to remove his uncle from governorships after his rapacious conduct had led to unrest.12 The giving of lavish gifts among the Valois court circle was routine,13 and on this occasion Berry had special reason to be generous.
The cup next appears as the property of another royal uncle, and collector, John of Lancaster, 1st Duke of Bedford (1389-1435), son of Henry IV, who was briefly Regent of both France and England for his infant nephew Henry VI. How he acquired the cup is not known, but he would had received many gifts from Charles VI, and had both lent him money and bought other objects such as the library of the Palais du Louvre, in the uneasy period when Charles had made peace with the English and made Henry V his heir. After the death of his brother Henry V, Bedford struggled to stem the resurgent French resistance, which was energised by Joan of Arc, and died in Normandy in 1435, leaving Henry VI as his heir.14 The cup is the first item in a list of valuables received from Bedford's estate prepared for Henry VI's minister Cardinal Henry Beaufort, although for some reason it does not appear in a royal inventory of 1441.15 Perhaps this was because it had been pawned, as it was in 1449 and again in 1451, on both occasions to finance England's increasingly unsuccessful efforts to hold on to French territory.16
It first appears in records of the new Tudor dynasty under Henry VIII, in 1521. By now the cover had lost the finial &quot;garnished with four sapphires, three balas rubies and fifteen pearls&quot; described in Charles VI's inventory and has a new one of gold in the form of a closed, or &quot;imperial&quot; crown. This matches a propaganda drive at this time by Henry to assert England as an &quot;empire&quot;, a contemporary sense meaning a state recognising no superior. Other uses had probably been found for the jewels of the old finial; it is assumed that the lower band with the Tudor roses was added in Henry's reign.17 The cup is described in further inventories in 1532 and after Henry's death in 1547, and then under Elizabeth I it was inventoried in 1574 and 1596.18 
When James I succeeded to the English throne in 1603, one of his first priorities was to end the Anglo-Spanish War, which had been dragging on since 1585. A Spanish delegation arrived for the Somerset House Conference, which concluded with a treaty signed in 1604. The leader of the Habsburg diplomats was Juan Fern&lt;U+00E1&gt;ndez de Velasco, 5th Duke of Fr&lt;U+00ED&gt;as and Constable of Castile. The upper extension to the stem of the cup has a Latin inscription that translates as:

This cup of solid gold, a relic of the sacred treasure of England and a memorial to the peace made between the kings, the Constable Juan de Velasco, returning thence after successfully accomplishing his mission, presented as an offering to Christ the Peacemaker.19

The gift of &quot;some 70 items of silver and gold plate&quot; by James to the Constable, of which the cup was the most notable item, is documented on both the English and Spanish sides;20 the Constable wrote an account of his mission on his return, which mentions the gift from James; he had previously presented both James and the queen with elaborate cups, among other valuable gifts.21 According to Pauline Croft, &quot;With his usual over-generosity the king gave the departing envoys around half the large gold vessels from the royal possessions he had inherited from Elizabeth. The Constable himself received a stupendous gift of plate, including possibly the most venerable item in the collection, known as &quot;the Royal Gold Cup of the Kings of France and England&quot;.22 In 1610 the Constable gave the cup to a convent in Medina de Pomar, as the inscription describes. His deed of gift survives, and records that the gift was on condition that the cup was never alienated by the convent. A marginal note on the deed, in the Constable's own handwriting, records that he had obtained the permission of the Archbishop of Toledo for the cup to be used as a ciborium, or container for consecrated hosts. By this period a rule of the church normally forbade the use of vessels decorated on their inner surface as ciboria.
The cup stayed in the convent until 1882 when the nuns were short of funds and wanted to sell it. They decided they would get a better price in Paris than Spain, and the cup was entrusted to a priest who took it to Paris and approached several leading dealers and collectors. There had been a spate of forgeries of medieval objects, and the Parisians were suspicious, until one, Baron Pichon, researched the second added cylinder and was sufficiently convinced that this was the cup documented in 1604 to make a rather low offer, which was accepted. In the course of his researches the baron had contacted the current Duke of Fr&lt;U+00ED&gt;as, who had supplied useful information, and then initially congratulated the buyer on his purchase. However, on looking further into the matter the duke realized that the sale was contrary to the 1610 deed of gift he had discovered in the family archives, and sued in the French courts to recover the cup.23
The duke eventually lost his case in 1891, enabling a further sale that had been set up by Baron Pichon to proceed. This was to the leading firm of Messrs. Wertheimer of Bond Street in London,24 where the cup was seen by Augustus Wollaston Franks, who had been Keeper of British and Mediaeval Antiquities and Ethnography at the British Museum since 1866, and was president of the Society of Antiquaries. Samson Wertheimer agreed &quot;with much public spirit&quot; to sell the cup to the British Museum for the &lt;U+00A3&gt;8,000 it had cost the firm.25 Franks was worried by the new American collectors such as J. P. Morgan, and in 1891 wrote to Sir Henry Tate, of Tate Gallery fame: &quot;A very wonderful gold cup has appeared returned to this country after an absence of 287 years, and I am anxious to see it placed in the National Museum and not removed to America&quot;.26 He tried to get wealthy individuals to subscribe &lt;U+00A3&gt;500 each, but even with a grant of &lt;U+00A3&gt;2,000 from HM Treasury could not raise the price. He was forced to put up &lt;U+00A3&gt;5,000 of his own money temporarily while he continued to try to get smaller amounts from others, and by 1892 succeeded when the Treasury agreed to contribute the final &lt;U+00A3&gt;830; &quot;to Franks this was his greatest acquisition, and the one of which he was most proud&quot;.27 Apart from the Treasury, the &lt;U+00A3&gt;500 contributors were Franks and Wertheimer, the Worshipful Company of Goldsmiths, Charles Drury Edward Fortnum , the Duke of Northumberland, Lord Savile, Lord Iveagh and the Earl of Crawford.28
Creation and survival
Much the most prominent decoration on the cup is the cycle of scenes from the life of Saint Agnes, which is rarely depicted in such detail in art. However there was one outstanding devotee of the saint in the period; King Charles V of France, Berry's older brother and Charles VI's father. Charles V was born on Saint Agnes' feast day, January 21st, in 1338, and is recorded as owning at least 13 works of art featuring her, including a gold cup enamelled with scenes from her life.29 Until recent decades the generally agreed hypothesis was that Berry had ordered the cup as a present for his brother in 1380, to be ready for his birthday in January 1381. When the king died in September 1380 had retained it himself for a decade before presenting it to Charles VI. However Lightbown, in 1978, rejected this on stylistic grounds, considering that the cup must have been created only shortly before it appears in Charles VI's inventory in 1391.30 Whether it was intended from the start as a gift to Charles, and why the life of Saint Agnes was chosen as a subject, are left unclear in this new theory; John Cherry, the former Keeper of the medieval collections at the British Museum, still presents the older dating in a work of 2010.31
Another traditional assumption, shared by almost all writers, was that the cup was a piece of secular plate, for use at table, or display on a buffet beside it;32 Lightbown remarks that at over four pounds in weight it is much too heavy to drink from conveniently.33 The buffet of the period was more like a modern Welsh dresser or shop display unit, with receding shelves for displaying on important occasions all the plate of the household that was not in use.34 However John Cherry, noting the exclusively religious subjects depicted (including that on the lost tripod stand) considers that the cup may have been intended as a ciborium from the start,35 either to accompany in its carrying case the duke on his tours of his many castles and palaces, or perhaps for his foundation of the Saint Chapelle at his capital of Bourges, intended to rival the king's Sainte-Chapelle in Paris and his brother's foundation at Champmol in Dijon.36 There are only four other known survivals of basse taille enamel on gold, one a small reliquary also in the British Museum, and none as fine as the cup.37 The closest comparison to the Royal Gold Cup is perhaps the silver-gilt M&lt;U+00E9&gt;rode Cup of about 1400, which is the only surviving example of plique &lt;U+00E1&gt; jour enamel, a difficult technique which creates a see-through effect like stained glass.38
As a secular piece the cup would be an almost unique survival at this level of quality, &quot;the one representative left to us of medieval secular plate in its most sumptuous development&quot;.39 Although French plate in silver in gold was made in great quantities, and at a high level of quality, &quot;French silver made prior to the early 19th century is probably scarcer than that of any other country&quot;.40 The cost of even very skilled labour was low compared to that of the materials, and in the absence of any reliable way of either depositing or investing money, it was turned into lavish objects, in the knowledge that it might well need to sold or melted down to finance some future project. If it survived long enough to become old fashioned it was likely to be melted down and remodelled in a new style.41
The four sons of King John II of France, Charles V, Louis I, Duke of Anjou (1339-1384), Berry and Philip the Bold, Duke of Burgundy (1342-1404) all spent huge sums on works in gold and silver, as well as other works of art. Although it is Berry who is especially remembered as a patron, partly because he specialized in illuminated manuscripts, which have very little value in their materials, his brother Louis of Anjou had over 3,000 pieces of plate at one point, including wholly secular pieces with sculptures in enamel that can only be imagined by comparison to the handful of reliquaries, like the British Museum's Holy Thorn Reliquary, that have survived from the period.42 However to finance a war to pursue his claim to the Kingdom of Naples, in 1381 Anjou melted down almost all his plate. According to Lorenzo Ghiberti, writing seventy years later, one of Anjou's goldsmiths, called Gusmin and &quot;a most skillful sculptor, of great talent&quot;, was so affected by the destruction of his life's work that he joined a eremetic monastic order and lived out his days in silence.43 Berry died in 1416 with no male heir, and deeply in debt. Those of his works in precious metal and jewels that had not already gone to his creditors were mostly seized by the English when they took Paris in July 1417.44
This was the first of a number of periods that saw the large-scale destruction of goldsmith's work that the cup escaped, but thousands of other pieces did not, a survival that Brigitte Buettner finds &quot;almost miraculous&quot;.45 In particular, the move to Spain in 1604 enabled it to avoid the dispersal and destruction of the English Crown Jewels and royal collection of plate under The Protectorate.46
Iconography
The cycle of scenes from the life of Saint Agnes, and that of her foster-sister Saint Emerentiana, follows the traditional story as given in the Golden Legend of Jacobus de Voragine, the most popular compilation of hagiographies of the age, whose wording corresponds to some of the inscriptions in banderoles or scrolls that explain the scenes; others are quotations from the Latin Vulgate bible.47 The top of the cover takes the story to Agnes' martyrdom in five scenes, shown with a continuous groundline from which small rocks and trees rise up to demarcate the scenes. Agnes and her sister were virgins of Rome in the time of Constantine; all figures are shown in contemporary 14th century dress.48
In the first scene the two girls are returning from school, Agnes accompanied by her punning attribute, a lamb with a cruciform halo. They are accosted by Procopius, the young son of the Prefect of Rome, who has fallen in love with Agnes and shows her an open casket of jewels to pursuade her to marry him. The inside of the casket is white, and the only area of opaque enamel in the original work. Agnes, not being a Valois, rejects him, with the words &quot;Illi sum desponsata cui angeli serviunt&quot; (I am betrothed to him who the angels serve) in a banderole above. The Prefect stands behind his son, and in the next scene has sentenced her to serve in a brothel for being a Christian who refuses to sacrifice to the goddess Vesta. She stands outside the sentry box-like brothel, looking down at the Prefect's son who has been struck dead and has a devil crouched over him; a banderole reads &quot;Quo modo cecidisti qui mane oriebaris (How has thou fallen that risest in the morning), Isaiah xiv.12, and the Prefect looks on sadly.49
Notes

References

&quot;British Museum Highlights&quot; web page
&quot;British Museum Investigation&quot; Investigation of the 'rouge clair' glass on the Royal Gold Cup webpage
&quot;British Museum collection database&quot; web page
Buettner, Brigitte, Past Presents: New Year's Gifts at the Valois Courts, Ca. 1400, The Art Bulletin, 2001, Volume 83, Issue 4, Page 598+
Caxton, William, translation of Jacobus de Voragine, Golden Legend, online version of Temple Classics edition, with modernized spelling, 1275/1483, accessed June 16, 2010
Cherry, John, The Holy Thorn Reliquary, The British Museum Press, 2010, ISBN 9780714128207
Croft, Pauline. England and the Peace with Spain, 1604: Pauline Croft Analyses the Causes and Traces the Consequences of a Momentous Treaty, History Review, Issue 49, 2004
Dalton O.M., The Royal Gold Cup in the British Museum, British Museum, 1924
Henderson, George. Gothic, 1967, Penguin, ISBN 0140208062
Lightbown R.W., Secular Goldsmiths' Work in Medieval France: A History, Reports of the Research Committee of the Society of Antiquaries of London vol. XXXVI, 1978, pp. 75-82 (excerpt online at &quot;British Museum collection database&quot;)
Osborne, Harold (ed), The Oxford Companion to the Decorative Arts, 1975, OUP, ISBN 0198661134
Snyder, James, Northern Renaissance Art, 1985, Harry N. Abrams, ISBN 0136235964
Steane, John, The Archaeology of the Medieval English Monarchy, Routledge, 1999, ISBN 0415197880, 9780415197885
Ungerer, Gustav. Juan Pantoja De la Cruz and the Circulation of Gifts between the English and Spanish Courts in 1604/5, Shakespeare Studies, 1998
Ward, Gerald W. R. (ed), The Grove encyclopedia of materials and techniques in art, Oxford University Press US, 2008, ISBN 0195313917, 9780195313918
Wilson, David M., The British Museum; A History, The British Museum Press, 2002, ISBN 0714127647 0714127647

Further reading

Baron, Fran&lt;U+00E7&gt;oise; Avril, Fran&lt;U+00E7&gt;ois; Chapu, Phillipe; Gaborit-Chopin, Danielle; Perrot, Fran&lt;U+00E7&gt;oise, Les fastes du gothique: le si&lt;U+00E8&gt;cle de Charles V, Paris, Galeries nationales du Grand Palais, R&lt;U+00E9&gt;union des mus&lt;U+00E9&gt;es nationaux, 1981 (in French) - Catalogue of an exhibition including the cup
Maryon, H, New Light on the Royal Gold Cup, The British Museum Quarterly, Vol. 16, No. 2, April 1951, JSTOR - on the enamelling technique.
Read, Sir Hercules, The Royal Gold Cup of the Kings of France and England, now preserved in the British Museum, Vestuta Monumenta, 1904


Category:Medieval European objects in the British Museum Category:Gold objects Category:Enamel



Lightbown↩
&quot;British Museum collection database&quot;↩
Dalton, 1↩
There are illustrations of the original shape in Dalton's Figure 1 (drawing), and Cherry, p. 24 (edited photo, also in Henderson, 138)↩
Dalton, 1, and Lightbown. See provenance section for the missing parts.↩
&quot;British Museum Investigation&quot;↩
Dalton, 1-4; &quot;British Museum collection database&quot;↩
Wood and leather case British Museum collection database. Registration number: 1892,0501.2↩
Dalton, 8-9. The inventories are BnF Mss Fr 21445 (f.1b) and 21446 (f.45b)↩
Translation from Dalton, 8-9↩
Cherry, 39-43↩
Dalton, 9↩
The subject of Buettner's article; Cherry, 47, gives alarming statistics↩
Dalton, 10↩
Dalton, 8. It is the only surviving piece of metalwork from the list, according to Buettner↩
Dalton, 8↩
Dalton, 1 and 8↩
Dalton, 8↩
Translation &quot;British Museum collection database&quot;. Dalton has the reading &quot;sacred (royal) treasure&quot;, p. 5.↩
Ungerer, quoted here, has details and references↩
Dalton, 6. Ungerer describes several surviving bills of exchange; most of the Spanish gifts were bought in the Spanish Netherlands.↩
Croft↩
Dalton, 6↩
Dalton, 6. See also The Wertheimer Family, from the Jewish Museum (New York).↩
Dalton, 6↩
Wilson, 175↩
Wilson, 175-176 (quotation p. 176).↩
Dalton, 6; he lists some donors of smaller amounts. See also Wilson, 175-176 for more detail on the timing. Samson Wertheimer died in 1892, and the sale was actually concluded by his son Asher and other heirs, and the donation by them in his memory.↩
Lightbown, and Dalton, 10↩
Lightbown, in 1978. The old view is presented in Dalton, 10↩
Cherry, 25, and biography on rear cover. The &quot;British Museum Highlights&quot; page says &quot;about AD 1370-80&quot;, while the &quot;British Museum collection database&quot; web page says &quot;1390 (circa)&quot;!↩
Read, quoted in Dalton, 1, Steane, 135, Lightbown, Buettner, and others.↩
Lightbown↩
Steane, 135↩
Cherry, 25↩
Cherry, 41 on Berry's castles, and 43-44 on the Bourges Saint Chapelle.↩
Dalton, 11. The &quot;Salting Reliquary&quot;, British Museum Highlights, accessed, June 16, 2010↩
Ward, 189↩
Sir Hercules Read (see further reading), in 1904, quoted, Dalton, 1↩
Osbourne, 726,↩
Osbourne, 726,↩
Henderson, 134-139; Snyder, 16-17, and chapter 3 on the patronage of the brothers↩
Henderson, 136, Buettner↩
Cherry, 47-48↩
Buettner↩
Dalton, 6↩
Lightbown. See Caxton reference for an online English translation.↩
Lightbown↩
Lightbown↩


