

  Pope Benedict XVI (Latin: Benedictus PP. XVI; Italian: Benedetto XVI; German: Benedikt XVI; born Joseph Alois Ratzinger on 16 April 1927) is the 265th and reigning Pope, by virtue of his office of Bishop of Rome, the spiritual head of the Roman Catholic Church, and as such, Sovereign of the Vatican City State.1 He was elected on 19 April 2005 in a papal conclave, celebrated his Papal Inauguration Mass on 24 April, 2005, and took possession of his cathedral, the Basilica of St. John Lateran, on 7 May 2005. Pope Benedict XVI has both German and Vatican citizenship. He succeeded Pope John Paul II.
Benedict XVI is a well-known Roman Catholic theologian and a prolific author, a defender of traditional Catholic doctrine and values. He served as a professor at various German universities and was a theological consultant at the Second Vatican Council before becoming Archbishop of Munich and Freising and Cardinal. At the time of his election as Pope, Benedict had been Prefect of the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith (curial heads lose their positions upon the death of a pope)2 and was Dean of the College of Cardinals.
During his papacy, Benedict XVI has emphasized what he sees as a need for Europe to return to fundamental Christian values in response to increasing de-Christianisation and secularisation in many developed countries. For this reason, he proclaims relativism's denial of objective truth&lt;U+2014&gt;and more particularly, the denial of moral truths&lt;U+2014&gt;as the central problem of the 21st century. He teaches the importance for the Catholic Church and for humanity of contemplating God's salvific love and has reaffirmed the &quot;importance of prayer in the face of the activism and the growing secularism of many Christians engaged in charitable work.&quot;
Overview
 Benedict XVI was elected Pope at the age of 78. He is the oldest person to have been elected Pope since Pope Clement XII (1730–40). He had served longer as a cardinal than any Pope since Benedict XIII (1724–30). He is the ninth German Pope, the eighth having been the Dutch-German Pope Adrian VI (1522–23) from Utrecht. The last Pope named Benedict was Benedict XV, an Italian who reigned from 1914 to 1922, during World War I (1914–18).
Born in 1927 in Marktl am Inn, Bavaria, Germany, Ratzinger had a distinguished career as a university theologian before being appointed Archbishop of Munich and Freising by Pope Paul VI (1963–78). Shortly afterwards, he was made a cardinal in the consistory of June 27, 1977. He was appointed Prefect of the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith by Pope John Paul II in 1981 and was also assigned the honorific title of the cardinal bishop of Velletri-Segni on April 5, 1993. In 1998, he was elected sub-dean of the College of Cardinals. And on November 30, 2002, he was elected dean, taking, as is customary, the title of Cardinal bishop of the suburbicarian diocese of Ostia. He was the first Dean of the College elected Pope since Paul IV (1555–59) and the first cardinal bishop elected Pope since Pius VIII (1829–30).
Even before becoming Pope, Ratzinger was one of the most influential men in the Roman Curia, and was a close associate of John Paul II. As Dean of the College of Cardinals, he presided over the funeral of John Paul II and over the Mass immediately preceding the 2005 conclave in which he was elected. During the service, he called on the assembled cardinals to hold fast to the doctrine of the faith. He was the public face of the church in the sede vacante period, although, technically, he ranked below the camerlengo in administrative authority during that time. Like his predecessor, Benedict XVI maintains the traditional Catholic doctrines on artificial birth control, abortion and homosexuality.
As well as his native German, Benedict XVI fluently speaks Italian, French, English, Spanish and Latin, and has a knowledge of Portuguese. He can read Ancient Greek and biblical Hebrew.3 He has stated that his first foreign language is French. He is a member of a large number of academies, such as the French Acad&lt;U+00E9&gt;mie des sciences morales et politiques. He plays the piano and has a preference for Mozart and Bach.4
Early life (1927–1951)

Joseph Alois Ratzinger was born on 16 April, Holy Saturday, 1927 at Schulstra&lt;U+00DF&gt;e 11, at 8:30 in the morning in his parents' home in Marktl am Inn, Bavaria, Germany. He was baptized the same day. He was the third and youngest child of Joseph Ratzinger, Sr., a police officer, and Maria Ratzinger (n&lt;U+00E9&gt;e Peintner). His mother's family was originally from South Tyrol. Pope Benedict XVI's brother, Georg Ratzinger, a priest and former director of the Regensburger Domspatzen choir, is still alive. His sister, Maria Ratzinger, who never married, managed Cardinal Ratzinger's household until her death in 1991. Their great-uncle was the German politician Georg Ratzinger.
The pope's relatives agree that his priestly vocation was apparent from boyhood. At the age of five, Ratzinger was in a group of children who welcomed the visiting Cardinal Archbishop of Munich with flowers. Struck by the Cardinal's distinctive garb, he later announced the very same day that he wanted to be a cardinal.
Following his fourteenth birthday in 1941, Ratzinger was enrolled in the Hitler Youth &lt;U+2014&gt; as membership was required for all 14-year old German boys after December 19395 &lt;U+2014&gt; but was an unenthusiastic member and refused to attend meetings.6 His father was a bitter enemy of Nazism, believing it conflicted with the Catholic faith, according to biographer John L. Allen, Jr. In 1941, one of Ratzinger's cousins, a 14-year-old boy with Down syndrome, was killed by the Nazi regime in its campaign of eugenics.7 In 1943 while still in seminary, he was drafted at age 16 into the German anti-aircraft corps. Ratzinger then trained in the German infantry, but a subsequent illness precluded him from the usual rigours of military duty. As the Allied front drew closer to his post in 1945, he deserted back to his family's home in Traunstein after his unit had ceased to exist, just as American troops established their headquarters in the Ratzinger household. As a German soldier, he was put in a POW camp but was released a few months later at the end of the War in summer 1945. He reentered the seminary, along with his brother Georg, in November of that year.
Following repatriation in 1945, the two brothers entered Saint Michael Seminary in Traunstein, later studying at the Ducal Georgianum (Herzogliches Georgianum) of the Ludwig-Maximilian University in Munich. They were both ordained in Freising on June 29, 1951 by Cardinal Michael von Faulhaber of Munich. Joseph Ratzinger's dissertation (1953) was on St. Augustine and was entitled &quot;The People and the House of God in Augustine's Doctrine of the Church&quot;. His Habilitation (which qualified him for a professorship) was on Bonaventure. It was completed in 1957 and he became a professor of Freising College in 1958.
Pre-papal career
Academic career (1951–1977)
Ratzinger became a professor at the University of Bonn in 1959; his inaugural lecture was on &quot;The God of Faith and the God of Philosophy.&quot; In 1963, he moved to the University of M&lt;U+00FC&gt;nster, where his inaugural lecture was given in a packed lecture hall, as he was already well known as a theologian.
During this period, Ratzinger participated in the Second Vatican Council (1962–1965). Ratzinger served as a peritus (theological consultant) to Josef Cardinal Frings of Cologne. He was viewed during the time of the Council as a reformer, cooperating with radical Modernist theologians like Hans K&lt;U+00FC&gt;ng and Edward Schillebeeckx. Ratzinger became an admirer of Karl Rahner, a well-known academic theologian of the Nouvelle Th&lt;U+00E9&gt;ologie and a proponent of church reform.
In 1966, Joseph Ratzinger was appointed to a chair in dogmatic theology at the University of T&lt;U+00FC&gt;bingen, where he was a colleague of Hans K&lt;U+00FC&gt;ng. In his 1968 book Introduction to Christianity, he wrote that the pope has a duty to hear differing voices within the Church before making a decision, and he downplayed the centrality of the papacy. He also wrote that the Church of the time was too centralized, rule-bound and overly controlled from Rome . During this time, he distanced himself from the atmosphere of T&lt;U+00FC&gt;bingen and the Marxist leanings of the student movement of the 1960s that quickly radicalized, in the years 1967 and 1968, culminating in a series of disturbances and riots in April and May 1968. Ratzinger came increasingly to see these and associated developments (such as decreasing respect for authority among his students) as connected to a departure from traditional Catholic teachings.8 Despite his reformist bent, his views increasingly came to contrast with the liberal ideas gaining currency in theological circles.9
Some voices, among them Hans K&lt;U+00FC&gt;ng, deem this a turn towards Conservatism, while Ratzinger himself said in a 1993 interview, &quot;I see no break in my views as a theologian [over the years]&quot;.10 Ratzinger has continued to defend the Council against criticism, including Nostra Aetate, the document on respect of other religions, ecumenism and the declaration of the right to freedom of religion. (Later, as the Prefect for the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith, Ratzinger most clearly spelled out the Catholic Church's position on other religions in the 2000 document Dominus Iesus which also talks about the Roman Catholic way to engage in ecumenical dialogue.)
During his years at T&lt;U+00FC&gt;bingen University, Ratzinger publicized articles in the reformist theological journal Concilium, though he increasingly chose less reformist themes than other contributors to the magazine such as Hans K&lt;U+00FC&gt;ng and Edward Schillebeeckx.
In 1969, he returned to Bavaria, to the University of Regensburg. He founded the theological journal Communio, with Hans Urs von Balthasar, Henri de Lubac, Walter Kasper and others, in 1972. Communio, now published in seventeen languages, including German, English and Spanish, has become a prominent journal of contemporary Catholic theological thought. Until his election as Pope, he remained one of the journal's most prolific contributors.
Archbishop of Munich and Freising (1977–1982)
 On March 24, 1977, Ratzinger was appointed Archbishop of Munich and Freising. He took as his episcopal motto Cooperatores Veritatis (Co-workers of the Truth) from 3 John 8, a choice he comments upon in his autobiographical work, Milestones. In the consistory of the following June 27, he was named Cardinal Priest of Santa Maria Consolatrice al Tiburtino by Pope Paul VI. By the time of the 2005 Conclave, he was one of only fourteen remaining cardinals appointed by Paul VI, and one of only three of those under the age of 80. Of these, only he and William Wakefield Baum took part in the conclave.11
Prefect of the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith (1981–2005)

 On November 25, 1981, Pope John Paul II named Ratzinger Prefect of the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith, formerly known as the Holy Office, the historical Inquisition. Consequently, he resigned his post at Munich in early 1982. He was promoted within the College of Cardinals to become Cardinal Bishop of Velletri-Segni in 1993, was made the College's vice-dean in 1998 and dean in 2002.
In office, Ratzinger fulfilled his institutional role, defending and reaffirming Catholic doctrine, including teaching on topics such as birth control, homosexuality, and inter-religious dialogue. During his period in office, the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith took disciplinary measures against some outspoken liberation theologians in Latin America, condemning liberation theology twice (in 1984 and 1986), accusing it of Marxist tendencies and of inciting hate and violence. Leonardo Boff, for example, was suspended, while others were censured. Other issues also prompted condemnations or revocations of rights to teach: for instance, some posthumous writings of Jesuit priest Anthony de Mello were the subject of a notification. Ratzinger and the Congregation viewed many of them, particularly the later works, as having an element of religious indifferentism (i.e., Christ was &quot;one master alongside others&quot;).
The Congregation is best known for its authority over the teaching of Church doctrine, but it also has jurisdiction over other matters, including cases involving the seal of the confessional, clerical sexual misconduct and other matters, in its function as what amounts to a court. In his capacity as Prefect, Ratzinger's 2001 letter &lt;U+201C&gt;Crimen Sollicitationis&lt;U+201D&gt; which clarified the confidentiality of internal Church investigations into accusations made against priests of certain crimes, including sexual abuse, became a target of controversy during the sex abuse scandal.12 While bishops hold the secrecy pertained only internally, and did not preclude investigation by civil law enforcement, the letter was often seen as promoting a coverup.13
On March 12, 1983 Ratzinger as prefect and cardinal notified the lay faithful and the clergy that archbishop Pierre Martin Ngo Dinh Thuc had incurred the excommunication latae sententiae for illicit episcopal consecrations without the apostolic mandate.
Health
Because of age-related health problems, and in order to have free time to write, he had hoped to retire, and submitted his resignation three times, but had continued at his post in obedience to the wishes of Pope John Paul II. In the early 1990s, Ratzinger suffered a stroke, which slightly impaired his eyesight temporarily. This was known to the Conclave that elected him Pope. In August 1992, on a vacation in the Alps, he fell and struck his head against a radiator. In May 2005, the Vatican revealed that he had subsequently suffered another mild stroke; it did not reveal when, other than that it had occurred between 2003 and 2005. France's Philippe Cardinal Barbarin further revealed that since the first stroke, Ratzinger had been suffering from a heart condition as a result of his age, and is currently on medication. It is also notable that he appears to be in far better health than his predecessor was at the age of 79.14 In late November 2006, an unconfirmed rumor emerged that Pope Benedict had undergone an operation in preparation for an eventual bypass operation, and that the bronchitis suffered by the Pope has put undue pressure on the Pope's heart.15
Papacy
Election to the papacy

Prediction
On January 2, 2005, Time magazine quoted unnamed Vatican sources as saying that Ratzinger was a front runner to succeed John Paul II should the pope die or become too ill to continue as pope. On the death of John Paul II, the Financial Times gave the odds of Ratzinger becoming pope as 7–1, the lead position, but close to his rivals on the liberal wing of the church. In April 2005, before his election as pope, he was identified as one of the 100 most influential people in the world by Time magazine. While Prefect of the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith, Ratzinger repeatedly stated he would like to retire to his house in the Bavarian village of Pentling near Regensburg and dedicate himself to writing books.
Piers Paul Read wrote in The Spectator on March 5, 2005:

Though Ratzinger was increasingly considered the front runner by much of the international media, others maintained that his election was far from certain since very few papal predictions in modern history had come true. The elections of both John Paul II and his predecessor, John Paul I had been rather unexpected. Despite being the favorite (or perhaps because he was the favorite), it was a surprise to many that he was actually elected, as traditionally the frontrunners are passed over by the conclave for someone else.
Election
On April 19, 2005, Cardinal Ratzinger was elected as the successor to Pope John Paul II on the second day of the papal conclave after four ballots. Cardinal Ratzinger had hoped to retire peacefully and said that &quot;At a certain point, I prayed to God 'please don't do this to me'...Evidently, this time He didn't listen to me.&quot;16 Coincidentally, April 19 is the feast of St. Leo IX, the most important German pope of the Middle Ages, known for instituting major reforms during his pontificate.
Before his first appearance at the balcony of Saint Peter's Basilica after becoming pope, he was announced by Jorge Medina Est&lt;U+00E9&gt;vez, protodeacon of the College of Cardinals. Cardinal Medina Est&lt;U+00E9&gt;vez first addressed the massive crowd as &quot;dear(est) brothers and sisters&quot; in Italian, Spanish, French, German and English, with each language receiving cheers from the international crowd, before continuing with the traditional Habemus Papam announcement in Latin.
At the balcony, Benedict's first words to the crowd, given in Italian before he gave the traditional Urbi et Orbi blessing in Latin, were: 
On April 24, he celebrated the Papal Inauguration Mass in St. Peter's Square, during which he was invested with the Pallium and the Ring of the Fisherman. Then, on May 7, he took possession of his Cathedral church, the Archbasilica of St. John Lateran.
Choice of name
Ratzinger chose the pontifical name Benedict, which in Latin means &quot;the blessed&quot;, in honor of both Pope Benedict XV and Saint Benedict of Nursia. Pope Benedict XV was Pope during the first World War, during which time he passionately pursued peace between the warring nations. St. Benedict of Nursia was the founder of the Benedictine monasteries (most monasteries of the Middle Ages were of the Benedictine Order) and the author of the Rule of Saint Benedict, which is still the most influential writing regarding the monastic life of Western Christianity.
Benedict XVI explained his choice of name during his first General Audience in St. Peter's Square, on April 27, 2005:

Tone of papacy

Pope Benedict XVI's first trip in the Popemobile

During his inaugural Mass, the previous custom of every cardinal submitting to the Pope was replaced by having twelve people, including cardinals, clergy, religious, a married couple and their child, and newly confirmed people, greet him. (The cardinals had formally sworn their obedience upon his election.) He has begun using an open-topped papal car, saying that he wanted to be closer to the people. Pope Benedict has continued the tradition of his predecessor John Paul II and baptizes several infants in the Sistine Chapel at the beginning of every year, in his pastoral role as Bishop of Rome.
Benedict's coat of arms has omitted the papal tiara, which traditionally appears in the background to designate the Pope's position as a worldly ruler like a king, replacing it with a simple mitre, emphasizing his spiritual authority.17 Although some papal documents since his inauguration appear to include the papal tiara, this is because the arms of the Holy See itself (as opposed to his personal arms) continue to use the tiara and crossed keys, as can be observed, for example, on the website of the Holy See and other official publications. Because it is the shield alone (regardless of its background elements) which is unique to the individual Pope, varying backgrounds are possible for a single shield, though this is rarely done. Pope Benedict XVI also included a traditional pallium beneath his shield as a background element for his arms, emphasizing his pastoral powers.
Beatifications
On May 9, 2005, Benedict XVI began the beatification process for his predecessor, Pope John Paul II. Normally, five years must pass after a person's death before the beatification process can begin. However, in an audience with Pope Benedict, Camillo Ruini, Vicar General of the Diocese of Rome and the official responsible for promoting the cause for canonization of any person who dies within that diocese, cited &quot;exceptional circumstances&quot; which suggested that the waiting period could be waived. The &quot;exceptional circumstances&quot; apparently refer to the cries of &quot;Santo subito!&quot; (&quot;Saint now!&quot;) during pontiff's funeral (saints can be declared by popular acclaim, although this is rare). Therefore, the Pope waived the five year rule &quot;so that the cause of Beatification and Canonization of the same Servant of God can begin immediately.&quot;18 The decision was announced on May 13, 2005, the Feast of Our Lady of Fatima and the 24th anniversary of the attempt on John Paul II's life.19 John Paul II often credited Our Lady of Fatima for preserving him on that day. Cardinal Ruini inaugurated the diocesan phase of the cause for beatification in the Lateran Basilica on June 28, 2005.20
The first beatification under the new Pope was celebrated on May 14, 2005, by Jos&lt;U+00E9&gt; Cardinal Saraiva Martins. The new Blesseds were Mother Marianne Cope and Mother Ascensi&lt;U+00F3&gt;n Nicol Go&lt;U+00F1&gt;i. Mariano de la Mata was beatified in November 2006 and Rosa Eluvathingal was beatified December 3 of that year, and Fr. Basil Moreau is scheduled to be beatified by next year. In October 2008 the following beatifications will take place: Celestine of the Mother of God, Giuseppina Nicoli, Hendrina Stenmanns, Maria Rosa Flesch, Marta Anna Wiecka, Michal Sopocko, Petrus Kibe Kasui and 187 Companions, Susana Paz-Castillo Ramirez.
Unlike his predecessor, Benedict XVI delegated the beatification liturgical service to a Cardinal. On September 29, 2005, the Congregation for the Causes of Saints issued a communiqu&lt;U+00E9&gt; announcing that henceforth beatifications would be celebrated by a representative of the Pope, usually the Prefect of that Congregation.21
Canonizations
Pope Benedict XVI celebrated his first canonizations on October 23, 2005 in St. Peter's Square when he canonized Josef Bilczewski, Alberto Hurtado SJ, Zygmunt Gorazdowski, Gaetano Catanoso, and Felice da Nicosia. The canonizations were part of a Mass that marked the conclusion of the Synod of Bishops and the Year of the Eucharist.22 Pope Benedict XVI canonized Bishop Rafael Guizar y Valencia, Mother Theodore Guerin, Filippo Smaldone, and Rosa Venerini on October 15, 2006.
During his visit to Brazil in 2007, Pope Benedict XVI presided over the canonization of Frei Galv&lt;U+00E3&gt;o on May 11, while George Preca, founder of the Malta based MUSEUM, Szymon of Lipnica, Charles of Mount Argus, and Marie-Eug&lt;U+00E9&gt;nie de J&lt;U+00E9&gt;sus were canonized in a ceremony held at the Vatican on June 3 2007.23 Preca is the first Maltese saint since the country's conversion to Christianity in A.D. 60 when St. Paul converted the inhabitants.  In October 2008 the following canonizations will take place: Saint Alphonsa of India,24 Gaetano Errico, Narcisa de Jesus Martillo Moran, Mar&lt;U+00ED&gt;a Bernarda B&lt;U+00FC&gt;tler
Curia reform

Pope Benedict began downsizing the Roman Curia when he merged four existing pontifical councils into two in March 2006. The Pontifical Council for Migrants was merged with the Pontifical Council for Justice and Peace headed by Cardinal Martino. Likewise, Cardinal Poupard, who headed the Pontifical Council for Culture, now also oversees the operations of what had been the Pontifical Council for Interreligious Dialogue, though both Councils maintained separate officials and staffs while their status and competencies continued unchanged. In May 2007 it was decided that Interreligious Dialogue would again become a separate body under a different President.
Teachings

As Pope, Benedict XVI's main role is to teach about the Catholic faith and the solutions to the problems of discerning and living the faith, a role that he can play well as a former head of the Church's Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith. The main points of emphasis of his teachings are stated in more detail in Theology of Pope Benedict XVI.
&quot;Friendship with Jesus Christ&quot;
 According to commentators, during the Inaugural Mass, the core of the Pope's message, the most moving and famous part, is found in the last paragraph of his homily where he referred to both Jesus Christ and John Paul II. After referring to John Paul II's well-known words, &quot;Do not be afraid! Open wide the doors for Christ!&quot;, Benedict XVI said:

&quot;Friendship with Jesus Christ&quot; is a frequent theme of his preaching.252627 He stressed that on this intimate friendship, &quot;everything depends.&quot;28 He has also said: &quot;We are all called to open ourselves to this friendship with God... speaking to him as to a friend, the only One who can make the world both good and happy... That is all we have to do is put ourselves at his disposal...is an extremely important message. It is a message that helps to overcome what can be considered the great temptation of our time: the claim, that after the Big Bang, God withdrew from history.&quot;29 Thus, in his book Jesus of Nazareth, his main purpose was &quot;to help foster [in the reader] the growth of a living relationship&quot; with Jesus Christ.30
He took up this theme in his first encyclical Deus Caritas Est. In his personal explanation and summary of the encyclical, he stated: &quot;If friendship with God becomes for us something ever more important and decisive, then we will begin to love those whom God loves and who are in need of us. God wants us to be friends of his friends and we can be so, if we are interiorly close to them.&quot;31 Thus, he said that prayer is &quot;urgently needed...It is time to reaffirm the importance of prayer in the face of the activism and the growing secularism of many Christians engaged in charitable work.&quot;
&quot;Dictatorship of Relativism&quot;
Continuing what he said in the pre-conclave Mass about what he has often referred to as the &quot;central problem of our faith today&quot;,32 on June 6, 2005 Pope Benedict also said: 
He said that &quot;a dictatorship of relativism&quot;33 was the core challenge facing the church and humanity. At the root of this problem, he said, is Kant's &quot;self-limitation of reason&quot;. This, he said, is contradictory to the modern acclamation of science, whose excellence is based on the power of reason to know the truth. He said that this self-amputation of reason leads to pathologies of religion such as terrorism and pathologies of science such as ecological disasters.34 Benedict traced the failed revolutions and violent ideologies of the twentieth century to a conversion of partial points of view into absolute guides. He said &quot;Absolutizing what is not absolute but relative is called totalitarianism.&quot;35
In an address to a conference of the Diocese of Rome held at the basilica of St. John Lateran June 6, 2005, Benedict remarked on the issues of same sex marriage and abortion:


The various forms of the dissolution of matrimony today, like free unions, trial marriages and going up to pseudo-matrimonies by people of the same sex, are rather expressions of an anarchic freedom that wrongly passes for true freedom of man...from here it becomes all the more clear how contrary it is to human love, to the profound vocation of man and woman, to systematically close their union to the gift of life, and even worse to suppress or tamper with the life that is born.36


Christianity as the Religion according to Reason
In the discussion with secularism and rationalism, one of Benedict's basic ideas can be found in his address on the &quot;Crisis of Culture&quot; in the West, a day before Pope John Paul II died, when he referred to Christianity as the Religion of the Word (the original Greek, Logos, meaning reason, meaning, or intelligence). He said: 
Benedict thus endorses creative reason, manifested in the crucified God as love, which contrasts with the strict rationality of the Enlightenment.
Encyclicals: Love and hope
Pope Benedict has to date written two encyclicals, Deus Caritas Est (Latin for &quot;God is Love&quot;), and Spe Salvi (&quot;Saved by Hope&quot;).
In his first encyclical, &quot;God is love&quot;, he said that a human being, created in the image of God who is love, is able to practice love: to give himself to God and others (agape), by receiving and experiencing God's love in contemplation (eros). This life of love, according to him, is the life of the saints such as Teresa of Calcutta and the Blessed Virgin Mary, and is the direction Christians take when they believe that God loves them in Jesus Christ.37
The encyclical contains almost 16,000 words in 42 paragraphs. The first half is said to have been written by Benedict in German, his mother tongue, in the summer of 2005; the second half is derived from uncompleted writings left by his predecessor, Pope John Paul II.38 The document was signed by Pope Benedict on Christmas Day, 25 December 2005.39 The encyclical was promulgated a month later in Latin and was translated into English, French, German, Italian, Polish, Portuguese, and Spanish. It is the first encyclical to be published since the Vatican decided to assert copyright in the official writings of the Pope.40
Pope Benedict's second encyclical titled Spe Salvi (&quot;Saved by Hope&quot;), about the virtue of hope, was released on November 30 2007.4142 His third encyclical will be social in nature, and reportedly an extension of Pope Paul VI's encyclical Populorum Progressio, and will be title Caritas in Veritate (charity in truth).43
Post-synodal apostolic exhortation
Sacramentum Caritatis (The Sacrament of Charity) signed 22 February 2007, released in Latin, Italian, English, French, German, Portuguese, Spanish, and Polish. It was made available in various languages March 13 2007 in Rome. The English edition from Libera Editrice Vaticana is 158 pages. This exhortation &quot;seeks to take up the richness and variety of the reflections and proposals which emerged from the recent Ordinary General Assembly of the Synod of Bishops...&quot; which was held in 2006.44
Motu proprio on Tridentine Mass

 On 7 July 2007, Benedict XVI issued the motu proprio Summorum Pontificum, declaring that upon &quot;the request of the faithful&quot;, celebration of Mass according to the Missal of 1962 (commonly known as the Tridentine Mass), was to be more easily permitted. Stable groups who previously had to petition their bishop to have a Tridentine Mass may now merely request permission from their local priest.45 While Summorum Pontificum directs that pastors should provide the Tridentine Mass upon the requests of the faithful, it also allows for any qualified priest to offer private celebrations of the Tridentine Mass, to which the faithful may be admitted if they wish.46 For regularly scheduled public celebrations of the Tridentine Mass, the permission of the priest in charge of the church is required.47
In an accompanying letter, the Pope outlined his position concerning questions about the new guidelines,48 emphasizing that the Tridentine Mass would not detract from the Second Vatican Council, and that the Mass of Paul VI would still be the norm and priests were not permitted to refuse to say the Mass in that form. He pointed out that use of Tridentine Mass &quot;was never juridically abrogated and, consequently, in principle, was always permitted.&quot;49 The letter also decried &quot;deformations of the liturgy ... because in many places celebrations were not faithful to the prescriptions of the new Missal&quot; as the Second Vatican Council was wrongly seen &quot;as authorizing or even requiring creativity&quot;, mentioning his own experience.50
The Pope also considered that allowing the Tridentine Mass to those who request it was a means to prevent schism, stating that, on occasions in past history, &quot;not enough was done by the Church&lt;U+2019&gt;s leaders to maintain or regain reconciliation and unity&quot; and that this &quot;imposes an obligation on us today: to make every effort to enable for all those who truly desire unity to remain in that unity or to attain it anew.51 Many feel the decree aimed at ending the schism between the Holy See and traditionalist groups such as the Society of St. Pius X (SSPX). Dar&lt;U+00ED&gt;o Castrill&lt;U+00F3&gt;n Cardinal Hoyos, the president of the Pontifical Commission that oversees the Tridentine Mass stated that the decree &quot;opened the door for their return,&quot; and said &quot;I wouldn't understand if they don't come back.&quot; Bishop Bernard Fellay, superior general of the SSPX, expressed &quot;deep gratitude to the Sovereign Pontiff for this great spiritual benefit.&quot;52, but also said that the group &quot;had to iron out doctrinal differences with the Vatican before a reconciliation could take place.&quot;
Some Jewish groups criticized the move because of petitions for the conversion of the Jews included in the Tridentine Good Friday liturgy, which had been reworded by the liturgical reforms.53 Some Catholic voices feared that the move would entail a reversal of the Second Vatican Council.54
Unicity and Salvific Universality of the Church
Near the end of June 2007, the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith issued a document approved by Benedict XVI &quot;because some contemporary theological interpretations of Vatican II's ecumenical intent had been 'erroneous or ambiguous' and had prompted confusion and doubt.&quot;55 The document has been seen as restating &quot;key sections of a 2000 text the pope wrote when he was prefect of the congregation, Dominus Iesus.&quot;56
The document issued on June 29, 2007 stated in part that &quot;oriental Churches [i.e. Eastern Christianity] ...[merit the title sister Churches] Because these Churches, although separated, have true sacraments and above all &lt;U+2013&gt; because of the apostolic succession &lt;U+2013&gt; the priesthood and the Eucharist, by means of which they remain linked to us [Roman Catholicism] by very close bonds. ...However, since communion with the Catholic Church, the visible head of which is the Bishop of Rome and the Successor of Peter, is not some external complement to a particular Church but rather one of its internal constitutive principles, these venerable Christian communities lack something in their condition as particular churches.&quot;57  The document went on to say &quot;Christian Communities born out of the Reformation of the sixteenth century... do not enjoy apostolic succession in the sacrament of Orders, and are, therefore, deprived of a constitutive element of the Church. These ecclesial Communities which, specifically because of the absence of the sacramental priesthood, have not preserved the genuine and integral substance of the Eucharistic Mystery cannot, according to Catholic doctrine, be called &quot;Churches&quot; in the proper sense.&quot;58
The document stated that &quot;the full identity of the Church of Christ&quot; is the Roman Catholic Church.59 It said that the Catholic Church notes &quot;that there are 'numerous elements of sanctification and of truth' which are found outside her structure, but which 'as gifts properly belonging to the Church of Christ, impel towards Catholic Unity'. It follows that these separated churches and Communities, though we believe they suffer from defects, are deprived neither of significance nor importance in the mystery of salvation. In fact the Spirit of Christ has not refrained from using them as instruments of salvation, whose value derives from that fullness of grace and of truth which has been entrusted to the Catholic Church.&quot;60
The approval of the document drew some criticism, such as the statement by the World Alliance of Reformed Churches which said &quot;It makes us question whether we are indeed praying together for Christian unity.&quot;61 The statement continued that the document &quot;makes us question the seriousness with which the Roman Catholic Church takes its dialogues with the Reformed family and other families of the church&quot;. The leading Lutheran cleric in Germany Bishop Wolfgang Huber wondered why no attempt was made to use more diplomatic language saying, &quot;it would also be completely sufficient if it were to be said that the reforming churches are 'not churches in the sense required here' or that they are 'churches of another type' &lt;U+2014&gt; but none of these bridges is used&quot; in the Vatican document.&quot;62 Others, such as Rev. Sara MacVane, of the Anglican Centre in Rome, saw it as in line with the previous position of the Church but questioned the timing of its release, saying &quot;I don't know what motivated it at this time.&quot;63 The Russian Orthodox Church, however, called the document &quot;honest&quot;, noting that it contains nothing new and was conducive to &quot;an honest theological dialogue.&quot;64 The issuing of this document and the recent allowance made by Benedict XVI for more widespread use of the traditional Tridentine Mass was seen by some of his critics as a move towards conservatism, some even &quot;raised questions about Benedict&lt;U+2019&gt;s commitment to the changes made during the Second Vatican Council.&quot;65

Consumerism

Benedict XVI has condemned excessive consumerism, especially among youth. He stated in December 2007 that &quot;[A]dolescents, youths and even children are easy victims of the corruption of love, deceived by unscrupulous adults who, lying to themselves and to them, draw them into the dead-end streets of consumerism.&quot;66
Ecumenical efforts
Speaking at his weekly audience in St Peter's Square on 7 June 2006, Pope Benedict asserted that Jesus himself had entrusted the leadership of the Church to his apostle Peter. &quot;Peter's responsibility thus consists of guaranteeing the communion with Christ,&quot; said Pope Benedict. &quot;Let us pray so that the primacy of Peter, entrusted to poor human beings, may always be exercised in this original sense desired by the Lord, so that it will be increasingly recognised in its true meaning by brothers who are still not in communion with us.&quot; The Catholic Church teaches that the Pope has a leading role among Christians because as Bishop of Rome he is successor to the apostle Peter who first held the office. The role of the papacy remains a source of controversy, not only for Protestant denominations but also for Eastern Orthodox churches, who likewise do not accept Petrine primacy as defined at the First Vatican Council.67
Dissident Catholics
On August 29, 2006, Pope Benedict XVI met with Bishop Bernard Fellay of the traditionalist Society of St. Pius X, an international society of traditionalist Roman Catholic priests, which since 1975 has existed in a state of dispute with the leadership of the Roman Catholic Church. Bishop Fellay had previously issued a statement welcoming the election of Cardinal Ratzinger as Pope.68
Orthodox
The bishops of the Ecumenical Orthodox Patriarchate of Constantinople have expressed concern over Pope Benedict XVI's decision to strike out &quot;patriarch of the West&quot; from his official titles in the Vatican yearbook. In a June 8, 2006 statement, the chief secretary of the Orthodox bishops' synod said dropping &quot;patriarch of the West&quot; while retaining the titles &quot;vicar of Jesus Christ&quot; and &quot;supreme pontiff of the universal church&quot; is &quot;perceived as implying a universal jurisdiction of the bishop of Rome over the entire church, a claim that the Orthodox have never accepted.&quot; The statement was issued after synod members discussed the change during their early June meeting. Cardinal Walter Kasper, president of the Pontifical Council for Promoting Christian Unity, said in a March statement that dropping the title of patriarch in reference to the pope does not minimize the importance of the patriarchal office, particularly in relation to the ancient Eastern churches. &quot;Even less can this suppression be seen as implying new claims&quot; of power or authority on the part of the Vatican, he said. However, members of the Orthodox synod disagreed. From their point of view, &quot;the geographical limits of each ecclesiastical jurisdiction&quot; have been a key part of the structure of the church from the earliest days of Christianity. The church as a whole is &quot;a unity of full local churches&quot; and not a monolith divided into local units simply for the sake of easier governance. The Orthodox synod's statement said that, with the international Catholic-Orthodox theological dialogue set to begin again in September with plans to deal with the &quot;thorny problem&quot; of papal primacy, it would have been better not to have removed the title without consultation.69
A leading Muscovite Orthodox spokesman has said that a visit to Ukraine by Pope Benedict XVI would be &quot;untimely&quot;, according to the country's RISU news service. &quot;If Pope Benedict is a moral and a spiritual person and wants only good for Ukraine and its people, he will never take such an unreasonable step,&quot; said Valentyn Lukianyk, the head of the Union of Orthodox Brotherhoods of Ukraine. He was responding to the news that Ukrainian President Viktor Yushchenko has invited the Pope to visit the country. After the collapse of the Soviet Union there have been numerous clashes between Orthodox and Catholic believers over the ownership of parish properties that were confiscated by the Communists and handed over to the Russian Orthodox Church. At the same time, Orthodox leaders have complained that Catholics are engaged in &quot;proselytism&quot;, seeking converts among Orthodox believers. In his statement opposing a papal visit, Lukianyk said that relations between Catholics and Orthodox in Ukraine are now &quot;warming.&quot; A visit by Pope Benedict, he said, would place an undue burden on those sensitive ties.70
Archbishop Christodoulos, Archbishop of Athens, visited Pope Benedict XVI at the Vatican on December 13, 2006. It was the first official visit by a Church of Greece leader to the Vatican. Archbishop Christodoulos was present for the funeral of Pope John Paul II. The Ecumenical Patriarch of Constantinople, Bartholomew I, with other Orthodox prelates also were present for the funeral Mass, but did not participate liturgically.
Protestants
In 2005, Pope Benedict sent a message to the national synod of the Reformed Church of France, the country&lt;U+2019&gt;s main Protestant community, who thanked the Pontiff for this &lt;U+201C&gt;gesture of consideration.&lt;U+201D&gt;
In more general terms, Pope Benedict addressed Protestant churches in a speech during his trip to Cologne, Germany in 2005, discussing a &quot;renewed sense of our brotherhood&quot; and &quot;a more open and trusting climate between Christians belonging to the various Churches and Ecclesial Communities.&quot;71
According to John L. Allen, Jr.'s Cardinal Ratzinger, the Pope, a German himself, feels a bond towards Lutherans and has Lutheran friends. Allen, in fact, compares the then Cardinal Ratzinger's feelings towards Lutherans to the feelings John Paul had for Orthodox Christians in that both men wanted a divided Christendom to be reunited. The Pope is said to be rather ambivalent towards Martin Luther.
In Autumn 2006 Pope Benedict met with Rowan Williams, Archbishop of Canterbury and spiritual head of the Anglican Communion. They issued a Common Declaration, highlighting the previous 40 years of dialogue between Catholics and Anglicans while also acknowledging &quot;serious obstacles to our ecumenical progress.&quot;72 In January 2008, he also met with John Sentamu, Archbishop of York.73
The June 2007 clarification of Dominus Iesus, approved by the Pope, restated the Catholic Church's position that because of their lack of bishops in the historic episcopate, Protestant faith communities &quot;are not true Churches,&quot; as contrasted with Orthodox communities, which have bishops in the apostolic line and are therefore are considered true, if deficient, Churches.747576
Regarding the pope's comment, the Evangelical Lutheran Church of Denmark issued the statement: &quot;However, it has a destructive effect on ecumenical relations if one church deprives another church of the right to be called a church. It is just as destructive as if one Christian denies another Christian the right to be called a Christian.&quot;77
The Pope's claim that Protestant faith communities &quot;are not true Churches&quot;, was described by Adventists as &quot;nothing more than tradition&quot;.78
Dialogue with other religions
Pope Benedict is open to dialogue with other religious groups, and has sought to improve relations with them throughout his pontificate. He has, however, generated certain controversies in doing so.
Judaism
The World Jewish Congress &quot;welcomed&quot;  his election to the pontificate, noted &quot;his great sensitivity to the Jewish history and the Holocaust&quot;, and quoted the Pope in its press release:


Even if the most recent, loathsome experience of the Shoah (Holocaust) was perpetrated in the name of an anti-Christian ideology, which tried to strike the Christian faith at its Abrahamic roots in the people of Israel, it cannot be denied that a certain insufficient resistance to this atrocity on the part of Christians can be explained by an inherited anti-Judaism present in the hearts of not a few Christians.


However, Pope Benedict XVI's meeting with a Polish priest who has been accused of making anti-Jewish comments has shocked Jewish groups. The European Jewish Congress said that it was &quot;shocked&quot; in a letter to the Vatican.79 Benedict XVI has made two visits to synagogues to meet with their congregants, however. 8081 This is notable because there had only been one known Papal visit to a synagogue before Benedict XVI's administration, and that was by his predecessor, John Paul II.8283
Islam

Pope Benedict's relations with Islam have been at times strained. On 12 September 2006 Pope Benedict XVI delivered a lecture which touched on Islam at the University of Regensburg in Germany. The pope had previously served as professor of theology at the university, and his lecture was entitled &quot;Faith, Reason and the University&lt;U+2014&gt;Memories and Reflections&quot;. The lecture received much attention from political and religious authorities. Many Islamic politicians and religious leaders registered their protest against what they said was an insulting mischaracterization of Islam, although his focus was aimed towards the rationality of religious violence, and its effect on the religion. Muslims were particularly angry at8485 the following passage from the Pope's speech:
The passage originally appeared in the &lt;U+201C&gt;Dialogue Held With A Certain Persian, the Worthy Mouterizes, in Anakara of Galatia&lt;U+201D&gt;,86 written in 1391 as an expression of the views of the Byzantine emperor Manuel II Paleologus, one of the last Christian rulers before the Fall of Constantinople to the Muslim Ottoman Empire, on such issues as forced conversion, holy war, and the relationship between faith and reason. According to the German text, the Pope's original comment was that the emperor &quot;addresses his interlocutor in an astoundingly harsh &lt;U+2014&gt; to us surprisingly harsh &lt;U+2014&gt; way&quot; (wendet er sich in erstaunlich schroffer, uns &lt;U+00FC&gt;berraschend schroffer Form).87 Pope Benedict apologised for any offence he had caused and made a point of visiting Turkey, a predominantly Muslim country, and praying in its Blue Mosque.
Pope Benedict XVI planned on March 5 2008 to meet with Muslim scholars and religious leaders autumn 2008 at a Catholic-Muslim seminar in Rome.88

Tibetan Buddhism
The Dalai Lama congratulated Pope Benedict XVI upon his election,89 and visited him in October 2006 in the Vatican City. Benedict declined to see him in 2007. It has been suggested that this was for political reasons involving the position of the Catholics living in China.90
Indigenous American beliefs
While visiting Brazil in May 2007, &quot;the pope sparked controversy by saying that native populations had been 'silently longing' for the Christian faith brought to South America by colonizers.&quot;91 The Pope continued, stating that &quot;the proclamation of Jesus and of his Gospel did not at any point involve an alienation of the pre-Columbus cultures, nor was it the imposition of a foreign culture.&quot;92 President Hugo Chavez of Venezuela demanded an apology, and an indigenous organization in Ecuador issued a response which stated that &quot;representatives of the Catholic Church of those times, with honorable exceptions, were accomplices, deceivers and beneficiaries of one of the most horrific genocides of all humanity.&quot;93 Later, the pope, speaking Italian, said at a weekly audience that it was &quot;not possible to forget the suffering and the injustices inflicted by colonizers against the indigenous population, whose fundamental human rights were often trampled.&quot;94
Apostolic journeys


 Pope Benedict has not made as many pastoral trips outside the Vatican as his predecessor. Nevertheless, Benedict has visited nine countries to date: his homeland, Germany, which he has visited twice, once for World Youth Day and once to visit the towns of his childhood. He has also visited Poland and Spain, where he was enthusiastically received. His visit to Turkey, an overwhelmingly Muslim nation two months after his visit to Bavaria, Germany was initially overshadowed by the controversy about a lecture he had given at Regensburg. His visit was met by nationalist and Islamic protesters95 and was placed under unprecedented security measures.96 However, the trip went ahead and Benedict made a joint declaration with Ecumenical Patriarch Bartholomew I in an attempt to begin to heal the rift between the Catholic and Orthodox churches.
In 2007, Pope Benedict visited Brazil in order to address the Bishops' Conference there and canonise Friar Ant&lt;U+00F4&gt;nio Galv&lt;U+00E3&gt;o, an 18th century Franciscan.
 On September 7, 2007, Pope Benedict arrived at Vienna International Airport at 11:15 a.m., where he was greeted by Austria's President Heinz Fischer and Cardinal Archbishop Christoph Sch&lt;U+00F6&gt;nborn.97 In the three-day visit, he joined Jewish leaders to pay a silent tribute to victims of the Nazi Holocaust. As a pilgrim, it is his seventh foreign trip in two years, and he joined Vienna's chief rabbi in a memorial to the 65,000 Viennese Jews who perished in Nazi death camps.98 During his stay in Austria, he also visited Mariazell.

 Pope Benedict XVI celebrates his 81st birthday with President George W. Bush and Mrs. Laura Bush.

On April 15, 2008 Pope Benedict XVI arrived in Washington, DC for a six day visit to the United States.99 This was Benedict's first visit to the United States since becoming Pope, and it is the first visit of a Pope to the U.S. since John Paul II's visit in 1999. While in Washington, DC, the Pope was formally received at the White House, met privately with U.S. President George W. Bush,100celebrated Mass at the Washington Nationals baseball stadium with 47,000 people101, and addressed representitives of US Catholic Universities in a speech at The Catholic University of America. The Pope also met privately with victims of sexual abuse by priests. On April 18, the pope addressed the General Assembly of the United Nations in New York. The following day, he presided over the first Papal Mass ever held in New York's St. Patrick's Cathedral. Later in the day he traveled to St. Joseph's Seminary, Dunwoodie in Yonkers, NY where he met with disabled children and their families and attended an event for Catholic youth, where he addressed the 25,000 young people in attendance.102 On April 20, the pope visited the World Trade Center site and later celebrated Mass at Yankee Stadium.103
Attire
 Pope Benedict XVI has re-introduced several papal garments which had previously fallen into disuse. Pope Benedict XVI resumed the use of the traditional red papal shoes, which had not been used since early in the pontificate of Pope John Paul II. Contrary to the initial speculation of the press that the shoes had been made by the Italian fashion house Prada, the Vatican announced that the shoes were provided by the pope's personal cobbler.104
On December 21, 2005, the pope began wearing the camauro, the traditional red papal hat usually worn in the winter. It had not been seen since the pontificate of Pope John XXIII (1958&lt;U+2013&gt;1963). On September 6, 2006 the pope began wearing the red cappello romano (also called a saturno), a wide-brimmed hat for outdoor use. Rarely used by John Paul II, it was more widely worn by his predecessors.
Pope Benedict XVI has also restored the use of all three forms of the papal mozzetta. While only the red satin summer mozzetta was used by John Paul II, Benedict XVI has also made use of the winter papal mozzetta and the paschal mozzetta, both of which were last worn by Pope Paul VI The winter papal mozzetta is of red velvet trimmed with white ermine, and the paschal mozzetta, worn only during the Eastertide, is of white damask silk trimmed with white ermine.
During his installment address, Pope Benedict XVI spoke at length about the significance of the pallium, and he has returned to an ancient version of the vestment, an Eastern design, used by the popes of the first millennium. Benedict XVI has also returned to wearing traditional forms of other liturgical vestments to emphasize the continuity of the papacy and the church.105
One item that Benedict has not worn to date is the papal tiara. Like his two immediate predecessors, Benedict chose not to be crowned with the tiara during his Inauguration Mass, nor has he worn it since that time. Unlike them, however, he has emphasized this decision by breaking with prior tradition in using a mitre instead of the tiara in his coat of arms. Other traditional pontifical vestments remain unused as well, including the fanon, the pontifical gloves, and the papal slippers.
Franco Zeffirelli, the famed Italian film director of numerous lavish productions, criticized the Pontiff's vestments as being too &quot;showy.&quot; He said that, &quot;These are not times of high-tailored church wear.&quot; Zeffirelli believes that Pope Benedict's garments are &quot;too sumptuous&quot; and make the pontiff appear cold and removed from his surroundings.106 The Vatican explained Benedict's use of traditional vestments such as older, much taller miters during his &quot;Urbi et Orbi&quot; Christmas greeting by pointing to the need &quot;to underline the continuity of today's liturgical celebration with that which characterized the life of the church in the past.&quot; The Pope's liturgist likened the use of vestments worn by previous popes to annotations in papal documents, where &quot;a pope cites the pontiffs who preceded him in order to indicate the continuity of the church's magisterium.&quot;107

Titles
The official title of the Pope is His Holiness Pope Benedict XVI; in Latin, Benedictus XVI, Episcopus Romae. However, his rarely-used full title is &quot;His Holiness Pope Benedict XVI, Bishop of Rome, Vicar of Jesus Christ, Successor of the Prince of the Apostles, Supreme Pontiff of the Universal Church, Primate of Italy, Archbishop and Metropolitan of the Roman province, Sovereign of the State of the Vatican City, Servant of the Servants of God.&quot;
Before 1 March 2006, the list of titles also used to contain that of a &quot;Patriarch of the West&quot;, which traditionally appeared in that list of titles before &quot;Primate of Italy.&quot; The title of &quot;Patriarch of the West&quot; was first adopted in the year 642 by Pope Theodore I, but was rarely used since the East-West Schism of 1054. From the Orthodox perspective, authority in the Church could be traced to the five patriarchates of Rome, Constantinople, Alexandria, Antioch, and Jerusalem. However, some Catholic theologians have argued that the term &quot;Patriarch of the West&quot; has no clear historical or theological basis and was introduced into papal court in 1870, at the time of the First Vatican Council. Pope Benedict chose to remove the title at a time when discussions with the Orthodox churches have centered on the issue of papal primacy. It has also been suggested that &quot;the West&quot; is a misnomer as the modern Latin Church is today global in its extent. Pope John Paul II reportedly considered dropping the title during his own pontificate.
Political positions
Turkey

In an 2004 Le Figaro, Ratzinger said that Turkey, which is demographically Muslim but governmentally secular by virtue of its state constitution (see Secularism in Turkey), should seek its future in an association of Muslim nations rather than the European Union, which Ratzinger has stated has Christian roots. He said Turkey had always been &quot;in permanent contrast to Europe&quot; and that linking it to Europe would be a mistake.108
Later visiting the country to &quot;reiterate the solidarity between the cultures,&quot; it was reported that he made a counter-statement backing Turkey's bid to join the EU. Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdo&lt;U+011F&gt;an, after meeting the pope upon his arrival in Ankara, the pope's first visit to a majority Muslim country, said that the pope told him that while the Vatican seeks to stay out of politics it desires Turkey's membership in the EU.109110 However, the Common Declaration of Pope Benedict XVI and Patriarch Bartholomew I of Constantinople implied that support for Turkey's membership in the European Union would be contingent on the establishment of religious freedom in Turkey:111 &quot;In every step towards unification, minorities must be protected, with their cultural traditions and the distinguishing features of their religion.&quot;112 The Declaration also reiterates Pope Benedict XVI's call for Europe to preserve its Christian roots.
Birth control and HIV/AIDS
It was widely reported in April 2006 that the Vatican had launched a commission to investigate and prepare a document regarding the question of whether there are any cases when a married person may use condoms to protect against infection from their spouse. Though no conclusions have yet been reached, the investigation has surprised many Catholics in the wake of John Paul II's consistent refusal to consider condom use in response to AIDS and the widespread belief that his successor shared this view.113 In November 2005 the Pope had listed several ways to combat the spread of HIV, including chastity, fidelity in marriage and anti-poverty efforts with no mention of condoms. However, Time Magazine reported in its April 30 2006 edition that the Vatican's position remains what it always has been with Vatican officials &quot;flatly dismiss[ing] reports that the Vatican is about to release a document that will condone any condom use.&quot;114
Korea
On November 13, 2006, Benedict said the dispute over the North Korea nuclear weapons program should be resolved through negotiations, in his first public comment on the security issue, a news report said. &quot;The Holy See encourages bilateral or multilateral negotiations, convinced that the solution must be sought through peaceful means and in respect for agreements taken by all sides to obtain the denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula.&quot; Benedict said in a speech to the new Japanese ambassador to Vatican.115
Migrants and refugees
In a message released November 14, 2006, during a Vatican press conference for the 2007 annual observance of World Day for Migrants and Refugees, the pope urged the ratification of international conventions and policies that defend all migrants, including refugees, exiles, evacuees, and internally displaced persons. &quot;The church encourages the ratification of the international legal instruments that aim to defend the rights of migrants, refugees and their families,&quot; the pope said. &quot;Much is already being done for the integration of the families of immigrants, although much still remains to be done.&quot;116
Pope Benedict has also promoted various UN events, such as World Refugee Day, on which he offered up special prayers for refugees and called for the international community to do more to secure refugees' human rights. He also called on Catholic communities and organizations to offer them concrete help.117
China

On June 28, 2006, for the first time in more than five years, an official Vatican delegation visited China and met with government officials, signaling a warming between the two nations that had previously been locked in conflict. &quot;This is a real gesture by the Vatican and its diplomats,&quot; said the Reverend Bernardo Cervellera, director of AsiaNews, a Catholic missionary news service with close links to the Vatican. In sending diplomats to Beijing, the Vatican, under Pope Benedict XVI, is publicly expressing interest in improving relations with China despite the recent conflicts.118
In 2007 Benedict sent a letter at Easter to Catholics in China that could have wide-ranging implications for the church's relationship with China's leadership. The letter provides long-requested guidance to Chinese bishops on how to respond to illicitly ordained bishops, as well as how to strengthen ties with the Patriotic Association and the Communist government.119
Interests

Pope Benedict XVI's interests include classical music and cats 120 He owns a specially engraved white Apple iPod and enjoys listening to music on it.121

See also

List of books by Pope Benedict XVI
Works of Pope Benedict XVI - literature written by Pope Benedict XVI
Theology of Pope Benedict XVI - philosophical and theological beliefs of Pope Benedict XVI
Georg G&lt;U+00E4&gt;nswein - private secretary to Benedict
Dominus Iesus - document written by Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith
The Message of Fatima - document on the release of the Third Secret of Fatima
Deus Caritas Est - first encyclical of Pope Benedict XVI
Spe Salvi - second encyclical of Pope Benedict XVI
Pope Benedict - list of other popes and antipopes using the name Benedict
List of encyclicals of Pope Benedict XVI
Papal regalia and insignia - papal attire

Further reading
Books by Pope Benedict


God of Jesus Christ (1978)
Daughter Zion: Meditations on the Church's Marian Belief (1983)
Schauen auf den Durchbohrten: Versuche zu einer spirituellen Christologie - The Theological Basis for a Spiritual Christology (1984) (English title Behold the Pierced One, Ignatius, 1986)
The Ratzinger Report (1985) ISBN 0-89870-080-9
Dogma and Preaching (Franciscan Herald, 1985)
Feast of Faith: Approaches to a Theology of the Liturgy (Ignatius, 1986)
Principles of Christian Morality (Ignatius, 1986)
Journey Towards Easter: Retreat Given in the Vatican in the Presence of Pope John Paul II (1987)
Principles of Catholic Theology: Building Stones for a Fundamental Theology (Ignatius, 1987)
Eschatology - Death and Eternal Life, Volume 9 in the series: Johann Auer and Joseph Ratzinger, Dogmatic Theology, ISBN 0-8132-0633-2 (The Catholic University of American Press, 1988)
''Mary: God's Yes to Man : Pope John Paul II Encyclical Letter : Mother of the Redeemer '' (Ignatius, 1988)
&quot;In the Beginning...&quot;: A Catholic Understanding of the Story of Creation and the Fall (Our Sunday Visitor, 1990)
To Look on Christ: Exercises in Faith, Hope, and Love (Crossroad, 1991)
Co-Workers of the Truth: Meditations for Every Day of the Year (Ignatius, 1992)
The Meaning of Christian Brotherhood (Ignatius, 1993)
A Turning Point for Europe?: The Church in the Modern World-Assessment and Forecast (Ignatius, 1994)
The Nature and Mission of Theology: Essays to Orient Theology in Today's Debates (Ignatius, 1995)
Called to Communion: Understanding the Church Today (Ignatius, 1996)
Gospel, Catechesis, Catechism: Sidelights on the Catechism of the Catholic Church (Ignatius, 1997)
Salt of the Earth: an interview with Peter Seewald (Ignatius, 1997) ISBN 0-89870-640-8
Catechism of the Catholic Church: Corrigenda (1998)
Ad Tuendam Fidem - to Protect the Faith (1998)
Milestones: Memoirs 1927-1977 (Ignatius, 1998)
Many Religions, One Covenant: Israel, the Church, and the World (1999)
The Spirit of the Liturgy (2000)
Introduction to Christianity, revised ed. (Ignatius, 2004)
God and the World: A Conversation With Peter Seewald (Ignatius, 2002)
God Is Near Us: The Eucharist, the Heart of Life (Ignatius, 2003)
Truth and Tolerance: Christian Belief And World Religions (Ignatius, 2004)
Way of the Cross at the Colosseum on Good Friday 2005, Introduction, and Meditations and prayers on the 14 Stations of the Cross.
The End of Time?: The Provocation of Talking about God (2005)
Pilgrim Fellowship Of Faith: The Church As Communion (Ignatius, 2005)
On the Way to Jesus Christ (Ignatius, 2005)
God's Revolution (Ignatius, 2006)
Christianity and the Crisis of Cultures (Ignatius, 2006)
Values in a Time of Upheaval (Ignatius, 2006)
God is Love (Deus Caritas Est), First Encyclical of Pope Benedict XVI (2006) ISBN 1574557580
Jesus of Nazareth (Doubleday, 2007) ISBN 0385523416
The Apostles (Our Sunday Visitor, 2007) ISBN 978-1592764051
Let God's Light Shine Forth:The Spiritual Vision of Pope Benedict XVI (edited by Robert Moynihan, Ph.D.), Doubleday, 2005. ISBN 978-0385-50793-6


Literature about Pope Benedict


Allen, John L.: Cardinal Ratzinger: the Vatican's enforcer of the faith. – New York: Continuum, 2000
Herrmann, Horst: Benedikt XVI. Der neue Papst aus Deutschland. – Berlin 2005
Nichols OP, Aidan: Theology of Joseph Ratzinger. – Edinburgh; T&amp;T Clark, 1988
Pater Prior Maximilian Heim: Joseph Ratzinger - Kirchliche Existenz und existenzielle Theologie unter dem Anspruch von Lumen gentium (diss.).
Twomey, D. Vincent, S.V.D.: Pope Benedict XVI: The Conscience of Our Age (A Theological Portrait). – San Francisco: Ignatius Press, 2007
Wagner, Karl: Kardinal Ratzinger: der Erzbischof in M&lt;U+00FC&gt;nchen und Freising in Wort und Bild. – M&lt;U+00FC&gt;nchen : Pfeiffer, 1977


Biographies of Pope Benedict


Allen, John L. The Rise of Benedict XVI: The Inside Story of How the Pope Was Elected and Where He Will Take the Catholic Church. NY: Doubleday, 2005. ISBN 0-385-51320-8.
Allen, John L. Pope Benedict XVI: A Biography of Joseph Ratzinger. New York: Continuum International Publishing Group, 2005. ISBN 0-8264-1786-8. This is a reprint of Allen's 2000 book Cardinal Ratzinger: the Vatican's Enforcer of the Faith, reprinted without Allen's permission.
Bardazzi, Marco. In the Vineyard of the Lord : The Life, Faith, and Teachings of Joseph Ratzinger, Pope Benedict XVI. New York: Rizzoli International, 2005. ISBN 0-8478-2801-8
Bunson, Matthew. We Have a Pope! Benedict XVI Huntington, IN: Our Sunday Visitor. ISBN 1-59276-180-1.
Tobin, Greg. Holy Father : Pope Benedict XVI: Pontiff for a New Era. Sterling, 2005. ISBN 1-4027-3172-8.
Weigel, George. God's Choice: Pope Benedict XVI and the Future of the Catholic Church, Harper Collins, 2005. ISBN 0-06-621331-2.


Documentaries

The Keys of the Kingdom, from John Paul II to Benedict XVI, produced by Vatican Television Center, distributed by HDH Communications, 2006.

References

External links and references




General

Deus Caritas Est – encyclical God is Love (in English)
Vatican: the Holy See – Vatican web site
The Holy See - The Holy Father - Benedict XVI – Vatican web site about the Holy Father Benedict XVI
Way of the Cross at the Colosseum on Good Friday 2005, Introduction, and Meditations and prayers on the 14 Stations of the Cross.
Vatican: Election Vatican web page about election
Communio magazine, founded by Ratzinger and others. Contains recent articles by him.
Official email address: 5 (see link 'Greetings to the Holy Father')
Oasis Oasis center features papal documents as well as theological texts into Arabic
Benedict XVI TV video speeches, events, clips
NBC News Special Report - Vatican Announces New Pope (Video)
Pope Benedict XVI's 2008 Prayer Intentions

The Pope and the Second Vatican Council

Card. Ratzinger's 1988 Remarks to the Bishops of Chile
Ten Years of the Motu Proprio &quot;Ecclesia Dei&quot;
The Indult Tridentine Rite of Mass - History of 1962 rubrics until motu proprio letter &quot;Summorum Pontificum&quot; which removed most restrictions on Tridentine Masses

Criticisms

Islam gets concessions; infidels get conquered By Raymond Ibrahim
Not what it was, but what it does by Spengler
Turning Back the Clock by Editorial Board
Pope Benedict and the Crisis of Truth by Jeffrey Robbins
Should the Pope receive the Dalai Lama? by Jan Turnau
Criticism for Tibetan silence by CathNews
Bush vs. Benedict By Daniel McCarthy
The Vicar of Orthodoxy' by Andrew Sullivan (Time, April 24 2005)
Most Holy Family Monastery A sedevacantist website that accuses Benedict XVI of being a heretic and an antipope.
Novus Ordo Watch A website whose archive documents many of what it calls bizarre and heretical statements and actions of Benedict XVI.
Open letter from a Christian Palestinian to Pope Benedict
About &quot;Jesus of Nazareth&quot;, the book of Benedict XVI, by philosopher Jean Luc Marion and writer Philippe Sollers (fr)
Pope Benedict XVI: The First Year, by Tikkun Magazine.





















af:Pous Benedictus XVI ar:&lt;U+0628&gt;&lt;U+064A&gt;&lt;U+0646&gt;&lt;U+064A&gt;&lt;U+062F&gt;&lt;U+0643&gt;&lt;U+062A&gt;&lt;U+0648&gt;&lt;U+0633&gt; &lt;U+0627&gt;&lt;U+0644&gt;&lt;U+0633&gt;&lt;U+0627&gt;&lt;U+062F&gt;&lt;U+0633&gt; &lt;U+0639&gt;&lt;U+0634&gt;&lt;U+0631&gt; roa-rup:Papa Benedictu XVI frp:Ben&lt;U+00EA&gt;t XVI ast:Benedictu XVI az:XVI Benedikt zh-min-nan:Benedictus 16-s&lt;U+00E8&gt; be:&lt;U+0411&gt;&lt;U+0435&gt;&lt;U+043D&gt;&lt;U+0435&gt;&lt;U+0434&gt;&lt;U+044B&gt;&lt;U+043A&gt;&lt;U+0442&gt; XVI, &lt;U+043F&gt;&lt;U+0430&gt;&lt;U+043F&gt;&lt;U+0430&gt; &lt;U+0440&gt;&lt;U+044B&gt;&lt;U+043C&gt;&lt;U+0441&gt;&lt;U+043A&gt;&lt;U+0456&gt; be-x-old:&lt;U+0411&gt;&lt;U+044D&gt;&lt;U+043D&gt;&lt;U+044D&gt;&lt;U+0434&gt;&lt;U+044B&gt;&lt;U+043A&gt;&lt;U+0442&gt; XVI (&lt;U+043F&gt;&lt;U+0430&gt;&lt;U+043F&gt;&lt;U+0430&gt; &lt;U+0440&gt;&lt;U+044B&gt;&lt;U+043C&gt;&lt;U+0441&gt;&lt;U+043A&gt;&lt;U+0456&gt;) bar:Benedikt XVI. bs:Papa Benedikt XVI bg:&lt;U+0411&gt;&lt;U+0435&gt;&lt;U+043D&gt;&lt;U+0435&gt;&lt;U+0434&gt;&lt;U+0438&gt;&lt;U+043A&gt;&lt;U+0442&gt; XVI ca:Benet XVI cs:Benedikt XVI. cy:Pab Bened XVI da:Pave Benedikt 16. pdc:Baapscht Benedict XVI de:Benedikt XVI. et:Benedictus XVI el:&lt;U+03A0&gt;&lt;U+03AC&gt;&lt;U+03C0&gt;&lt;U+03B1&gt;&lt;U+03C2&gt; &lt;U+0392&gt;&lt;U+03B5&gt;&lt;U+03BD&gt;&lt;U+03AD&gt;&lt;U+03B4&gt;&lt;U+03B9&gt;&lt;U+03BA&gt;&lt;U+03C4&gt;&lt;U+03BF&gt;&lt;U+03C2&gt; &lt;U+0399&gt;&lt;U+03A3&gt;&lt;U+03A4&gt;&lt;U+0384&gt; es:Benedicto XVI eo:Benedikto la 16-a eu:Benedikto XVI.a fo:Benadikt XVI fr:Beno&lt;U+00EE&gt;t XVI fy:Benediktus XVI fur:Pape Benedet XVI ga:P&lt;U+00E1&gt;pa Beinidict XVI gl:Bieito XVI, papa ko:&lt;U+AD50&gt;&lt;U+D669&gt; &lt;U+BCA0&gt;&lt;U+B124&gt;&lt;U+B515&gt;&lt;U+D1A0&gt; 16&lt;U+C138&gt; hi:&lt;U+091C&gt;&lt;U+094B&gt;&lt;U+091C&gt;&lt;U+093C&gt;&lt;U+092B&gt;&lt;U+093C&gt; &lt;U+0930&gt;&lt;U+0948&gt;&lt;U+0924&gt;&lt;U+094D&gt;&lt;U+0938&gt;&lt;U+093F&gt;&lt;U+0902&gt;&lt;U+0917&gt;&lt;U+0930&gt; hsb:Benedikt XVI. hr:Benedikt XVI. io:Benedictus 16ma ilo:Papa Benedicto XVI id:Paus Benediktus XVI is:Benedikt 16. it:Papa Benedetto XVI he:&lt;U+05D1&gt;&lt;U+05E0&gt;&lt;U+05D3&gt;&lt;U+05D9&gt;&lt;U+05E7&gt;&lt;U+05D8&gt;&lt;U+05D5&gt;&lt;U+05E1&gt; &lt;U+05D4&gt;&lt;U+05E9&gt;&lt;U+05D9&gt;&lt;U+05E9&gt;&lt;U+05D4&gt; &lt;U+05E2&gt;&lt;U+05E9&gt;&lt;U+05E8&gt; pam:Papa Benedict XVI ka:&lt;U+10D1&gt;&lt;U+10D4&gt;&lt;U+10DC&gt;&lt;U+10D4&gt;&lt;U+10D3&gt;&lt;U+10D8&gt;&lt;U+10E5&gt;&lt;U+10E2&gt;&lt;U+10D4&gt; XVI sw:Papa Benedikto XVI la:Benedictus XVI lb:Beno&lt;U+00EE&gt;t XVI. (Poopst) lt:Benediktas XVI li:Benedictus XVI ln:P&lt;U+00E1&gt;pa Benwa XVI hu:XVI. Benedek p&lt;U+00E1&gt;pa mk:&lt;U+041F&gt;&lt;U+0430&gt;&lt;U+043F&gt;&lt;U+0430&gt; &lt;U+0411&gt;&lt;U+0435&gt;&lt;U+043D&gt;&lt;U+0435&gt;&lt;U+0434&gt;&lt;U+0438&gt;&lt;U+043A&gt;&lt;U+0442&gt; XVI ml:&lt;U+0D2C&gt;&lt;U+0D46&gt;&lt;U+0D28&gt;&lt;U+0D46&gt;&lt;U+0D21&gt;&lt;U+0D3F&gt;&lt;U+0D15&gt;&lt;U+0D4D&gt;&lt;U+0D1F&gt;&lt;U+0D4D&gt; &lt;U+0D2A&gt;&lt;U+0D24&gt;&lt;U+0D3F&gt;&lt;U+0D28&gt;&lt;U+0D3E&gt;&lt;U+0D31&gt;&lt;U+0D3E&gt;&lt;U+0D2E&gt;&lt;U+0D28&gt;&lt;U+0D4D&gt;&lt;U+200D&gt; &lt;U+0D2E&gt;&lt;U+0D3E&gt;&lt;U+0D30&gt;&lt;U+0D4D&gt;&lt;U+200D&gt;&lt;U+0D2A&gt;&lt;U+0D4D&gt;&lt;U+0D2A&gt;&lt;U+0D3E&gt;&lt;U+0D2A&gt;&lt;U+0D4D&gt;&lt;U+0D2A&gt; mt:Papa Benedettu XVI mr:&lt;U+092A&gt;&lt;U+094B&gt;&lt;U+092A&gt; &lt;U+092C&gt;&lt;U+0947&gt;&lt;U+0928&gt;&lt;U+0947&gt;&lt;U+0921&gt;&lt;U+093F&gt;&lt;U+0915&gt;&lt;U+094D&gt;&lt;U+091F&gt; &lt;U+0938&gt;&lt;U+094B&gt;&lt;U+0933&gt;&lt;U+093E&gt;&lt;U+0935&gt;&lt;U+093E&gt; ms:Paus Benedict XVI nl:Paus Benedictus XVI nds-nl:Paus Benedictus XVI ja:&lt;U+30D9&gt;&lt;U+30CD&gt;&lt;U+30C7&gt;&lt;U+30A3&gt;&lt;U+30AF&gt;&lt;U+30C8&gt;16&lt;U+4E16&gt; (&lt;U+30ED&gt;&lt;U+30FC&gt;&lt;U+30DE&gt;&lt;U+6559&gt;&lt;U+7687&gt;) nap:Papa Benedetto XVI no:Benedikt XVI nn:Pave Benedikt XVI nrm:Benedictus XVI oc:Beneset XVI nds:Benedikt XVI. pl:Benedykt XVI pt:Papa Bento XVI ksh:Benedikt XVI. ro:Papa Benedict al XVI-lea ru:&lt;U+0411&gt;&lt;U+0435&gt;&lt;U+043D&gt;&lt;U+0435&gt;&lt;U+0434&gt;&lt;U+0438&gt;&lt;U+043A&gt;&lt;U+0442&gt; XVI (&lt;U+043F&gt;&lt;U+0430&gt;&lt;U+043F&gt;&lt;U+0430&gt; &lt;U+0440&gt;&lt;U+0438&gt;&lt;U+043C&gt;&lt;U+0441&gt;&lt;U+043A&gt;&lt;U+0438&gt;&lt;U+0439&gt;) sco:Pape Benedict XVI sq:Papa Benedikti XVI scn:Binidittu XVI simple:Pope Benedict XVI sk:Benedikt XVI. sl:Pape&lt;U+017E&gt; Benedikt XVI. sr:&lt;U+041F&gt;&lt;U+0430&gt;&lt;U+043F&gt;&lt;U+0430&gt; &lt;U+0411&gt;&lt;U+0435&gt;&lt;U+043D&gt;&lt;U+0435&gt;&lt;U+0434&gt;&lt;U+0438&gt;&lt;U+043A&gt;&lt;U+0442&gt; XVI sh:Benedikt XVI fi:Benedictus XVI sv:Benedictus XVI tl:Benedicto XVI ta:&lt;U+0BAA&gt;&lt;U+0BBE&gt;&lt;U+0BAA&gt;&lt;U+0BCD&gt;&lt;U+0BAA&gt;&lt;U+0BB0&gt;&lt;U+0B9A&gt;&lt;U+0BB0&gt;&lt;U+0BCD&gt; &lt;U+0BAA&gt;&lt;U+0BA4&gt;&lt;U+0BBF&gt;&lt;U+0BA9&gt;&lt;U+0BBE&gt;&lt;U+0BB1&gt;&lt;U+0BBE&gt;&lt;U+0BAE&gt;&lt;U+0BCD&gt; &lt;U+0BAA&gt;&lt;U+0BC6&gt;&lt;U+0BA9&gt;&lt;U+0B9F&gt;&lt;U+0BBF&gt;&lt;U+0B95&gt;&lt;U+0BCD&gt;&lt;U+0B9F&gt;&lt;U+0BCD&gt; roa-tara:Papa Benedetto XVI th:&lt;U+0E2A&gt;&lt;U+0E21&gt;&lt;U+0E40&gt;&lt;U+0E14&gt;&lt;U+0E47&gt;&lt;U+0E08&gt;&lt;U+0E1E&gt;&lt;U+0E23&gt;&lt;U+0E30&gt;&lt;U+0E2A&gt;&lt;U+0E31&gt;&lt;U+0E19&gt;&lt;U+0E15&gt;&lt;U+0E30&gt;&lt;U+0E1B&gt;&lt;U+0E32&gt;&lt;U+0E1B&gt;&lt;U+0E32&gt;&lt;U+0E40&gt;&lt;U+0E1A&gt;&lt;U+0E40&gt;&lt;U+0E19&gt;&lt;U+0E14&gt;&lt;U+0E34&gt;&lt;U+0E01&gt;&lt;U+0E15&gt;&lt;U+0E4C&gt;&lt;U+0E17&gt;&lt;U+0E35&gt;&lt;U+0E48&gt; 16 vi:Benedict XVI tpi:Benedict XVI tr:XVI. Benedictus uk:&lt;U+0411&gt;&lt;U+0435&gt;&lt;U+043D&gt;&lt;U+0435&gt;&lt;U+0434&gt;&lt;U+0438&gt;&lt;U+043A&gt;&lt;U+0442&gt; XVI ur:&lt;U+067E&gt;&lt;U+0648&gt;&lt;U+067E&gt; &lt;U+0628&gt;&lt;U+06CC&gt;&lt;U+0646&gt;&lt;U+06CC&gt;&lt;U+0688&gt;&lt;U+06A9&gt;&lt;U+0679&gt; XVI vec:Papa Benedeto XVI war:Papa Benedicto XVI cbk-zam:Papa Benedicto XVI bat-smg:Benedikts XVI zh:&lt;U+672C&gt;&lt;U+7BE4&gt;&lt;U+5341&gt;&lt;U+516D&gt;&lt;U+4E16&gt;
Benedict XVI Benedict XVI Ratzinger, Joseph Benedict XVI Benedict XVI Benedict XVI Benedict XVI Benedict XVI Benedict XVI *   Benedict XVI Benedict XVI Benedict XVI Benedict XVI Benedict XVI Benedict XVI Benedict XVI Benedict XVI Category:Vatican City people Benedict XVI



The precise number of popes has been a matter for scholarly debate for centuries. John A. Hardon's Modern Catholic Dictionary (1980) lists Pope John Paul II (1978–2005) as 264th Pope, making Benedict XVI the 265th.↩
John Paul II, Ap. Const. Pastor Bonus, I, General Norms, Art 6, June 28, 1988↩
↩
↩
The Third Reich in Power, Richard J Evans, 2005, pg 272↩
↩
↩
David Van Biema, The Turning Point, Time, April 24, 2005↩
Daniel J Wakin, &quot;Turbulence on Campus in 60's Hardened Views of Future Pope&quot;, New York Times, April 24 2005 (accessed June 8 2005)↩
Time Magazine. Keeper of the Straight and Narrow December 6, 1993↩
Catholic News, John Thavis and Cindy Wooden↩
Jamie Doward, Pope 'obstructed' sex abuse inquiry, The Observer, 2005-04-24; Accessed 2007-07-14↩
↩
&quot;Pope has had second stroke&quot;, The Sunday Times, (London) May 1 2005.↩
Vatican: Pope Benedict's gaffes result of high tension↩
http://www.cnn.com/2005/WORLD/europe/04/25/pope.monday/ Quote from a CNN Interview, April 25 2005.↩
Coat of Arms of His Holiness Benedict XVI, The Vatican.↩
Vatican.va - Canonisation of Pope John Paul II↩
Canonization process↩
Inauguration of beatification process↩
Vatican.va - Communiqu&lt;U+00E9&gt; on beatification process↩
First Canonizations↩
Canonizations in May-June 2007↩
Pope Announces Canonisation of India's First Native Woman Saint from Vatican Radio↩
Address to the priests of Rome↩
Address to cardinals pre-conclave↩
[Address to the public]↩

L'Osservatore Romano (9 October 2002) &quot;St. Josemar&lt;U+00ED&gt;a Escriv&lt;U+00E1&gt; and Opus Dei: God is very much at work in our world today&quot;.↩
Jesus of Nazareth↩
Address on Friendship with God↩
Address on Dictatorship of relativism accessed August 5 2006.↩
Dictatorship of relativism↩
Ratzinger, Truth and Tolerance: Christian Belief And World Religions, Ignatius Press, 2004↩
Benedict XVI, Address to the World Youth Day, Cologne, August 20, 2005↩
&quot;Pope Condemns Same-Sex Unions As 'Pseudo-Matrimony,' Reaffirms Opposition To Abortion&quot;, WSVN-TV, June 6 2005.↩
Pope Benedict XVI, papal encyclical, Deus Caritas Est.↩
Pope's first encyclical is disquisition on love and sex (The Times, 25 January, 2006)↩
The pope needs a theologian? Former papal adviser reveals why (Catholic News Service, 30 December 2005)↩
Vatican 'cashes in' by putting price on the Pope's copyright (The Times, 23 January 2006)↩
BREAKING: People need God to have hope, pope says in new encyclical↩
Website of the Vatican:Encyclicals Spe Savli↩
Populorum Progressio, Part Deux↩
Sacramentum Caritatis 5↩
↩
↩
Article 5 &lt;U+00A7&gt;4 of the motu proprio↩





↩

↩

William Cardinal Levada, Angelo Amato, S.D.B.; ratified and confirmed by Pope Benedict XVI, ''Responses to Some Questions Regarding Certain Aspects of the Doctrine on the Church, June 29, 2007.↩






↩
↩
↩
Benedict's call on papacy will increase divisions, says Italian Protestant↩
SSPX PRESS COMMUNIQU&lt;U+00C9&gt;: On the election of Pope Benedict XVI↩
Orthodox express concern about 'patriarch of the West' title↩
Ukrainian Orthodox spokesman opposes papal visit↩
APOSTOLIC JOURNEY TO COLOGNE ON THE OCCASION OF THE XX WORLD YOUTH DAY ECUMENICAL MEETING ADDRESS OF HIS HOLINESS POPE BENEDICT XVI↩
COMMON DECLARATION OF POPE BENEDICT XVI AND THE ARCHBISHOP OF CANTERBURY HIS GRACE ROWAN WILLIAMS↩
↩
Catholic Church alone is one, true church, says Vatican congregation↩


Evangelical Lutheran Church in Denmark's reply to the Roman Catholic Church↩
Adventists Call Catholic Claim Nothing More Than Tradition↩
Jewish group protests pope's meeting with anti-Semitic priest↩
New York Times, 1↩
The Vatican, 2↩
New York Times, 3↩
New York Times, 4↩
BBC Article. &quot;In quotes: Muslim reaction to Pope&quot; last accessed September 17, 2006↩
BBC News Article:&quot;Pope sorry for offending Muslims&quot;, last accessed September 17, 2006↩
&quot;The Pope, Jihad and &quot;Dialogue&quot;&quot;, The American Thinker, 19 September, 2005↩
&quot;Lecture of the Holy Father - Faith, Reason and the University Memories and Reflections&quot;, Libreria Editrice Vaticana, 12 September, 2006 ↩
&quot;Pope to hold seminar with Muslims&quot;, CNN, 5 March, 2008↩
&quot;His Holiness the Dalai Lama Greets New Pope&quot;, Phayul.com, April 20 2005; Korean Catholics Welcome New Pontiff&quot;, English.chosun.com, April 20 2005↩
&quot;Should the Pope Receive the Dalai Lama?&quot; Currier International November 27 2007, &quot;[http://www.adnkronos.com/AKI/English/Religion/?id=1.0.1604471683]Italy: China blamed for absence of Papal audience for Dalai Lama&quot; ADNKronos International November 27 2007↩
↩


Pope tries to quell anger over speech he gave in Brazil↩
&quot;Turks Protest Pope's Coming Visit&quot;↩
IOL | Massive security for Pope's Turkey visit↩
Vatican radio, Pope Benedict XVI Arrives in Vienna↩
BBC NEWS, Austria prepares to welcome Pope↩
&quot;Pope Benedict XVI begins first U.S. tour&quot; CNN↩
&quot;Bush, Thousands of Fans Welcome Pope at White House on His Birthday.&quot; Associated Press.↩
↩
[http://washingtontimes.com/apps/pbcs.dll/article?AID=/20080420/NATION/168699792/1001 Duin, Julia. &quot;Youth revel in pope's message&quot;. The Washington Times. 20 Apr 2008.↩
↩
Does The Pope Wear Prada? April 25, 2006 in the Wall Street Journal. Accessed January 19, 2007↩
Tribe, Shawn. &quot;Benedict XVI: The Liturgical Pope?&quot;. The New Liturgical Movement. 20 Dec 2007↩
Zeffirelli: Pope Benedict Needs Makeover December 15, 2007 in the Cleveland Examiner. Accessed December 27, 2007.↩
Papal use of old vestments connects with past, Vatican liturgist says December 26, 2007 in Catholic News Service. Accessed December 27, 2007.↩
Jim Bencivenga, &quot;Navigating a clash of civilizations: Examining the new pope's old comments on Turkey's entry into the European Union,&quot; Christian Science Monitor. 22 April 2005.↩
Pope Benedict Backs Turkey's European Union Bid↩
Pope calls for religious exchange↩
&quot;Pope did not change stance on Turkey and EU&quot;, Spero News, 30 November 2006↩
&quot;Common Declaration by His Holiness Benedict XVI and Patriarch Bartholomew I&quot;, 30 November 2006↩
Protection against AIDS↩
Time article &quot;Condom Fight: The Vatican Strikes Back&quot;↩
Pope urges talks to make Korean Peninsula nuclear free↩
Pope Benedict XVI message for 93rd World Day of Migrants and Refugees↩
Pope offers prayers to refugees for United Nations' World Refugee Day↩
Beijing receives Vatican delegation, signaling a thaw↩
Letter of Pope Benedict XVI to Chinese Catholics, May 27, 2007↩
Pope Benedict's creature comforts↩
Does The Pope Wear Prada? April 25, 2006 in the Wall Street Journal↩


