
 Margaret Walker (Margaret Abigail Walker Alexander by marriage) (July 7, 1915– November 30, 1998) was an American poet and writer. She was part of the African-American literary movement in Chicago. Her notable works include the award-winning poem For My People (1942) and the novel Jubilee (1966), set in the South during the American Civil War.
Biography
Walker was born in Birmingham, Alabama, to Sigismund C. Walker, a Methodist minister, and Marion (n&lt;U+00E9&gt;e Dozier) Walker, who helped their daughter by teaching her philosophy and poetry as a child. Her family moved to New Orleans when Walker was a young girl. She attended school there, including several years of college, before she moved north to Chicago.
In 1935, Walker received her Bachelor of Arts Degree from Northwestern University. In 1936 she began work with the Federal Writers' Project under the Works Progress Administration of the President Franklin D. Roosevelt administration during the Great Depression. She was a member of the South Side Writers Group, which included authors such as Richard Wright, Arna Bontemps, Fenton Johnson, Theodore Ward, and Frank Marshall Davis.1
In 1942, she received her master's degree in creative writing from the University of Iowa. In 1965, she returned to that school to earn her Ph.D.2
Walker married Firnist Alexander in 1943 and moved to Mississippi to be with him. They had four children together and lived in the capital of Jackson, Mississippi.
Academic career
Walker became a literature professor at what is today Jackson State University, a historically black college, where she taught from 1949 to 1979. In 1968, Walker founded the Institute for the Study of History, Life, and Culture of Black People (now the Margaret Walker Center). In 1976, she went on to serve as the Institute's director.3
Literary writing
In 1942, Walker's poetry collection For My People won the Yale Series of Younger Poets Competition under the judgeship of editor Stephen Vincent Benet.4 Her For My People was considered the &lt;U+201C&gt;most important collection of poetry written by a participant in the Black Chicago Renaissance before Gwendolyn Brooks&lt;U+2019&gt;s A Street in Bronzeville.&lt;U+201D&gt;5 Richard Barksdale says: &lt;U+201C&gt;The [title] poem was written when &quot;world-wide pain, sorrow, and affliction were tangibly evident, and few could isolate the Black man's dilemma from humanity's dilemma during the depression years or during the war years.&quot; He said that the power of resilience presented in the poem is a hope Walker holds out not only to black people, but to all people, to &quot;all the Adams and Eves.&lt;U+201D&gt;6
Walker&lt;U+2019&gt;s second novel, Jubilee (1966), is the story of a slave family during and after the Civil War, and is based on her great-grandmother's life.7 It took her thirty years to write. Roger Whitlow says. &quot;It serves especially well as a response to white 'nostalgia' fiction about the antebellum and Reconstruction South.&quot;8
This book is considered notable in African-American literature and Walker is an influential figure for younger authors. She was the first of a generation of women who started publishing more novels in the 1970s.
In 1975, Walker released three albums of poetry on Folkways Records - Margaret Walker Alexander Reads Poems of Paul Laurence Dunbar and James Weldon Johnson and Langston Hughes; Margaret Walker Reads Margaret Walker and Langston Hughes; and The Poetry of Margaret Walker.91011
Court cases
In 1988, Margaret Walker sued Alex Haley, claiming that his novel Roots: The Saga of an American Family had violated Jubilee's copyright by borrowing from her novel. The case was dismissed.
In 1991 Walker was sued by Ellen Wright, the widow of Richard Wright, on the grounds that Walker's use of unpublished letters and an unpublished journal in a just-published biography of Wright violated the widow's copyright. Wright v. Warner Books was dismissed by the district court, and this judgment was supported by the appeals court.12
Death
Walker died of breast cancer in Chicago, Illinois, in 1998.13
Works

(reprint 1968)






Film biography

For My People, The Life and Writing of Margaret Walker, distributed by California Newsreel

References

External links


Margaret Walker at Smithsonian Folkways
&quot;Margaret Walker: Select Bibliography&quot;, Modern American Poetry.




Category:20th-century American novelists Category:American women novelists Category:African-American writers Category:American Methodists Category:1915 births Category:1998 deaths Category:Deaths from breast cancer Category:Iowa Writers' Workshop alumni Category:Jackson State University faculty Category:Northwestern University alumni Category:People from Chicago, Illinois Category:Writers from Birmingham, Alabama Category:University of Iowa alumni Category:Works Progress Administration workers Category:People of the New Deal arts projects Category:African-American women writers



Knupfer, Anne Meis (2006). The Chicago Black Renaissance and Women's Activism. Champaign, IL: University of Illinois Press.↩


Bradley, George. &quot;Introduction&quot;, The Yale Younger Poets Anthology, New Haven and London: Yale University Press, p. 24.↩
Darlene Clark Hine, William C. Hine and Stanley C. Harrold, The African-American Odyssey, Upper Saddle, NJ: Prentice Hall, 2011, p. 522. ISBN 0-205-72883-9.↩
↩

↩
&quot;The Poetry of Margaret Walker&quot; (FW09795 / FL 9795), Smithsonian Folkways.↩
&quot;Margaret Walker Alexander Reads Langston Hughes, P.L. Dunbar, J.W. Johnson&quot; (FW09796 / FL 9796), Smithsonian Folkways.↩
&quot;Margaret Walker Reads Margaret Walker and Langston Hughes&quot; (FW09797), Smithsonian Folkways,↩
↩



