

Hamble Community Sports College is the only Secondary School in Hamble-le-Rice; the age of the pupils range from 11-16, and it does not have a Sixth Form. The head teacher is Mr. Ian Knights.
The School was visited by OFSTED in November 2001, where the quality of teaching received an overall &quot;good&quot; for both Years 7 - 9 and 10 - 11. Since then a number of renovations have taken place, increasing the facilities, and ultimately earning the school its Sports College status, climaxing with the opening of the Sports Complex in 2002. Recent site improvements include a Gymnastics Complex (opened in 2006), a dedicated Humanities (History, Religious Education and Geography) block, and renovation to the Technology, Music and Drama buildings.
Pastoral System
In September 2008, the school rearranged its tutoring system, and organised all students and teachers into a pastoral, vertical system. This means a mentor group consists of five students from each year, totalling 25 students. Every 'mentor group' must have at least one Young Leader in it, of which there are approximately 60 in Year 11. Furthermore, there are now Sports Young Leaders and Arts Young Leaders, which help out in their respective departments.
In addition, there are now four communities, named after sporting venues throughout the UK. These are Wembley, Wimbledon, Lords and Twickenham. Each house has a different tie colour and every teacher assigned to a community wears a specific badge.

Wembley - Stewart Lang - sky blue
Wimbledon - Barbara Wilke - purple
Lords - Mr Skinner - yellow
Twickenham - Ms Ault - green

Recent activity
The School has recently renovated, renamed, and reopened the After School Youth Club - entitled HYPE, an acronym for Hamble Young Persons Experience, offering out-of-school entertainment, such as gaming and out of hours trips in a supervised environment. On the 22nd of October the lower school hosted a 'Lower College Horror Ball' the ball was a great success and everybody enjoyed themselves.
Hamble Community sports college has an external link with Ferndale School in South Africa, a yearly festival takes place called Toplink, where students from younger years come up to the school and raise funds for Ferndale.
External links

Hamble Community Sports College
Hamble Sports Complex


Category:Secondary schools in Hampshire Category:Sports Colleges in England
