Theodore Garland, Jr. (born 28 November 1956) is a biologist specializing in evolutionary physiology. He was on the faculty at the University of Wisconsin&lt;U+2013&gt;Madison for 14 years, served at the National Science Foundation for one year, and is currently Professor of Biology at the University of California, Riverside. He earned his B.S. in Zoology and M.S. in Biology at the University of Nevada, Las Vegas, working with William Glenn Bradley, a mammalogist, and his Ph.D. in Ecology and Evolutionary Biology at the University of California, Irvine under Albert F. Bennett in the comparative physiology group that also included Grover C. Stephens. While in Las Vegas, he served as President of the Southern Nevada Herpetology Association. During his Ph.D. work, he recorded the speed of the world's fastest lizard, Ctenosaura similis. Subsequently, he completed postdoctoral training at the University of Washington with Raymond B. Huey, which included attending a course in quantitative genetics taught by Joe Felsenstein.
Dr. Garland serves as an Associate Editor for the journal Physiological and Biochemical Zoology, a Topic Editor for Comprehensive Physiology, is on the editorial boards of the Journal of Morphology,Zoology, and Frontiers, and on the advisory board for the Oxford University Press Ecological and Environmental Physiology Series. He is an Associate Director for the Network for Experimental Research on Evolution, a University of California Multicampus Research Program.
His major scientific contributions have been in the areas of:

lizard locomotor physiology and ecology;


allometry


phylogenetic comparative methods (e.g., Mesquite:PDAP:PDTree);


the application of artificial selection experiments to understand the correlated evolution of physiology and behavior, as well as the physiological, neurobiological, and genetic bases of voluntary activity levels (physical exercise).

Awards
In 1983-84, he was a Visiting Fulbright Scholar at the University of Wollongong, Australia, hosted by Anthony J. Hulbert. In 1991, he received a Presidential Young Investigator Award from the National Science Foundation.
Publications
Books

Garland, T., Jr., and M. R. Rose, eds. 2009. Experimental Evolution: Concepts, Methods, and Applications of Selection Experiments. University of California Press, Berkeley, California. In press. PDF of Table of Contents

Selected papers

Garland, T., Jr. 1983. The relation between maximal running speed and body mass in terrestrial mammals. Journal of Zoology, London 199:157-170. 1
Garland, T., Jr., and S. C. Adolph. 1991. Physiological differentiation of vertebrate populations. Annual Review of Ecology and Systematics 22:193-228. PDF
Garland, T., Jr., and S. C. Adolph. 1994. Why not to do two-species comparative studies: limitations on inferring adaptation. Physiological Zoology 67:797-828. PDF
Garland, T., Jr., and P. A. Carter. 1994. Evolutionary physiology. Annual Review of Physiology 56:579-621. PDF
Garland, T., Jr., A. F. Bennett, and E. L. Rezende. 2005. Phylogenetic approaches in comparative physiology. Journal of Experimental Biology 208:3015-3035. PDF
Swallow, J. G., and T. Garland, Jr. 2005. Selection experiments as a tool in evolutionary and comparative physiology: insights into complex traits - An introduction to the symposium. Integrative and Comparative Biology 45:387-390. PDF
Garland, T., Jr., H. Schutz, M. A. Chappell, B. K. Keeney, T. H. Meek, L. E. Copes, W. Acosta, C. Drenowatz, R. C. Maciel, G. van Dijk, C. M. Kotz, and J. C. Eisenmann. 2011. The biological control of voluntary exercise, spontaneous physical activity and daily energy expenditure in relation to obesity: human and rodent perspectives. Journal of Experimental Biology 214:206-229. PDF

See also

Allometry
Evolutionary physiology
Experimental evolution
Phylogenetic comparative methods

External links

Google Scholar Citations Profile
Garland web page
Garland publications
Video of mice running on a wheel
Video of Garland lecture on &quot;Born to Run: Evolution of Hyperactivity in Mice&quot; 29 Oct. 2009
Los Angeles Times Story &quot;Fitness fanatic or couch potato? Blame your DNA&quot; Alternate Link
Video of Dr. Garland discussing &quot;How to run far: Multiple solutions and sex-specific responses to selective breeding&quot;



Category:1956 births Category:Living people Category:American academics Category:American biologists Category:American physiologists Category:Evolutionary biologists Category:University of Nevada, Las Vegas alumni Category:University of California, Irvine alumni Category:University of Wisconsin&lt;U+2013&gt;Madison faculty Category:University of California, Riverside faculty
