

Dr. Rosina M. Bierbaum (born Sept. 30, 1952) is dean of the University of Michigan School of Natural Resources and Environment. She was hired in October 2001 by then U-M President Lee Bollinger.1
In April 2009, President Obama named her to the United States President's Council of Advisors on Science and Technology (PCAST).2 PCAST consists of 20 scientists and engineers. Its members advise the President and Vice President to help the administration formulate policy in the many areas where understanding of science, technology and innovation is key to forming policy.
In April 2008, the World Bank Group named Dr. Bierbaum to co-author and co-direct its World Development Report 2010: Development and Climate Change.3 The report focused on climate change and development. The report was released in October 2009.4 Her co-author was Dr. Marianne Fay.
Dr. Bierbaum is a Fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Science and a Fellow of the American Association for the Advancement of Science. In 2000, she received the Waldo E. Smith Medal of the American Geophysical Union; in 1999, she received the &quot;Climate Protection Award&quot; from the United States Environmental Protection Agency.
Dr. Bierbaum is a trustee of the University Corporation for Atmospheric Research (UCAR); and a board member for the Federation of American Scientists, The Energy Foundation, the Gordon E. and Betty I. Moore Foundation and the Environmental and Energy Study Institute. She is a member of the John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation's Science Advisory Council, the International Advisory Board for the journal Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment, the National Research Council's Board on Atmospheric Sciences and Climate, the Design Committee for The Heinz Center's The State of the Nation's Ecosystems project, and the Executive Committee for the Tyler Prize for Environmental Achievement.
She also serves as the U.S. Scientific Expert, Permanent Court of Arbitration of Disputes Relating to Natural Resources and/or the Environment, in the Hague.
At the University of Michigan, she co-chaired its Sustainability Task Force5 and the Deans' Council of the Graham Environmental Sustainability Institute. In 2007, Michigan Gov. Jennifer Granholm appointed her to serve on the Michigan Climate Action Council.
Washington experience
Before SNRE, Dr. Bierbaum was acting director of the [Office of Science and Technology Policy] (OSTP). Preceding that, she directed the Environment Division at OSTP. She was confirmed by the U.S. Senate as Associate Director for Environment of OSTP on July 30, 1998. She served as the Clinton Administration's senior scientific adviser on environmental research and development, with responsibilities for scientific input and guidance on a range of national and international environmental issues, including global change, air and water quality, biodiversity and ecosystem management.
She worked closely with President Clinton's National Science and Technology Council and co-chaired the council's Committee on Environmental and Natural Resources, which coordinated the $5 billion federal research and development efforts in this area, including the (then) $2 billion US Global Change Research Program. She led the U.S. government reviews of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change second and third assessment reports in 1995 and 2000. She also led the US delegations to the IPCC Plenary in Shanghai in 2001; Montreal in 1999; Costa Rica in 1998; and as alternate head in Mexico City in 1996. She headed the U.S. Delegation for the U.S./China bilateral on Climate Science in 2000.
Her career in Washington began in 1980 with a Congressional Fellowship. She continued working in the Office of Technology Assessment on a range of environmental issues, working with various Congressional committees to address science and policy concerns posed in such areas as acid rain, marine pollution and ozone depletion.
She co-authored Confronting Climate Change: Avoiding the Unmanageable and Managing the Unavoidable, a report prepared at the request of the Commission on Sustainable Development (2007). She is also the primary author of Changing By Degrees: Steps to Reduce Greenhouse Gases. This report (1991) identified a series of technical options to reduce U.S. and worldwide emissions. In 1993, she directed and was the primary author of the two-volume study, Preparing for an Uncertain Climate, which outlines a sustainable development strategy for the United States.
Dr. Bierbaum's doctoral work focused on understanding how multiple environmental stresses affect physiological parameters of growth, reproduction and glycogen storage in shellfish and their symbiotic organisms (pea crabs).
Notes
1 Senior White House science adviser named dean of SNRE
2 President Obama Announces Members of Science and Technology Advisory Council
3 Co-Directors Selected For 2010 World Development Report On Climate Change
4 'Climate Smart' World Within Reach, says World Bank
5 Task force report recommends eight key areas for U-M to monitor for environmental sustainability
External links

Dean Bierbaum's faculty profile at SNRE
Download 'Confronting Climate Change: Avoiding the Unmanageable and Managing the Unavoidable'
Download 'Changing By Degrees: Steps to Reduce Greenhouse Gases'
Michigan Climate Action Council



Category:Year of birth missing (living people) Category:Living people Category:Boston College alumni Category:Fellows of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences Category:Fellows of the American Association for the Advancement of Science Category:Stony Brook University alumni Category:University of Michigan faculty
