&quot;God's Gonna Cut You Down&quot;, also known as &quot;Run On&quot;, is a traditional folk song which has been recorded by numerous artists representing a variety of genres. The lyrics are a warning to sinners that no matter how hard they try, they will not avoid God's judgment; in the chorus, God tells the narrator of the song to 
The song has, in the past, been modified to fit the boundaries of genres like country, folk, gospel and techno. As &quot;God's Gonna Cut You Down&quot;, it was performed by Odetta on Odetta Sings Ballads and Blues (1956) and Johnny Cash on the posthumously released American V: A Hundred Highways (2006). As &quot;Run On&quot;, it was recorded, among others, by Elvis Presley. A version incorporating sampled vocals by Bill Landford &amp; The Landfordaires was included on Moby's album Play. The Blind Boys of Alabama also included the song on their Grammy-winning album Spirit of the Century in 2001. In 2007, Kevin Max of dc Talk covered the song as &quot;Run on for a Long Time&quot; with Chris Sligh.
Moby version

Electronic musician Moby released &quot;Run On&quot; as the second single from his studio album Play. Two versions of the CD were released. The first, with a red cover featuring a vertically-aligned mousetrap, featured two remixes of &quot;Run On&quot; and two other tracks. The second, with a yellow cover featuring a horizontally-aligned mousetrap, contained four different &quot;Run On&quot; remixes.
The vocal content of the song comes from a 1943 recording of &quot;Run On&quot; by Bill Landford and the Landfordaires, and features a mix of house music and instrumental music.
Track listing
CD 1

&quot;Run On&quot;- 3:33
&quot;Spirit&quot;- 4:12
&quot;Running&quot;- 7:04

CD 2

&quot;Run On (extended)&quot;- 4:24
&quot;Sunday&quot;- 5:00
&quot;Down Slow (full length)&quot;- 5:56

Music Video
There are two music videos for the song:
Video 1
The first video involves Moby working at an office where everyone wears white. It then shows an earlier scene involving a workout instructor teaching a class when she passes out. Moby then comes in and puts an inhaler in her mouth. It then continues to show an earlier scene, going backwards to tell the entire story: the office Moby works in is heaven, the instructor is self-conscious and not sure of her capabilities, and heaven is a self-help phone line. Eventually, it shows a scene of Moby dead in a parking lot, with another employee checking his pulse. It then concludes with a shot of Moby working in the same office, but it has a green light to it, and everyone is unkind and emotionally distant.
Video 2
The second music video involves an animated version of Moby's disembodied head floating through technicolor backgrounds, singing the song, with background voices provided by demons.
Johnny Cash version

Johnny Cash recorded a version of &quot;God's Gonna Cut You Down&quot; on American V: A Hundred Highways in 2003, with an arrangement quite different from most known gospel versions of the song. The song is presented with a rhythmic stomp-clap downbeat, grim and pessimistic in its portrayal of a vengeful and uncompromising God, serving as a warning to sinners.
A music video, directed by Tony Kaye,1 was made for this version in late 2006. It featured a number of celebrities, including:

Iggy Pop
Kanye West
Chris Martin
Kris Kristofferson
Patti Smith
Terrence Howard
Flea
Q-Tip
Adam Levine
Chris Rock
Justin Timberlake
Kate Moss
Sir Peter Blake
Sheryl Crow
Dennis Hopper
Woody Harrelson
Amy Lee
Tommy Lee
The Dixie Chicks
Mick Jones
Sharon Stone
Bono
Shelby Lynne
Anthony Kiedis
Travis Barker
Lisa Marie Presley
Kid Rock
Jay-Z
Keith Richards
Billy Gibbons
Corinne Bailey Rae
Johnny Depp
Graham Nash (holding photos of Johnny Cash)
Brian Wilson
Whoopi Goldberg (brief flash)
Rick Rubin
Owen Wilson

It also briefly features archive footage of Cash himself. The video was shot entirely in black and white. Since its release, both the song and video have seen moderate airplay.
The video won the 2008 Grammy Award for Best Short Form Music Video.
The Johnny Cash version can also be heard in the following:

In the 2007 documentary:The Most Hated Family in America.
As bumper music for the Alex Jones radio show.
In promotional commercials for the hit CW series Supernatural.
In the trailer for the 2006 documentary Deliver Us from Evil.
As entrance music for UFC Fighters Spencer Fisher and Jason Lambert, as well as professional wrestlers Tyson Dux, Brodie Lee, and &quot;The Southern States Outlaw&quot; Michael Cross.
As the entrance song for left handed relief pitcher Joe Beimel of the Colorado Rockies.
EastEnders used the recording in a 2008 promotional video for Max Branning's Judgement Day.
During the opening sequence and closing credits of David Ridgen's documentary Mississippi Cold Case made for the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation.
In the release trailer of the game &quot;Splinter Cell: Conviction&quot;.
In 2010, the recording was used in the opening titles sequence of the ITV (UK) series Father and Son.
As of June 16, 2010, a sample of the rhythm from this version is used as background music for a series of television commercials for the 2011 Jeep Grand Cherokee; most notably the &quot;Manifesto&quot; advertisement. 2
In a video entitled &quot;The Death of Liverpool FC&quot; intended to highlight the protest against the clubs current ownership. 3
Rapper RL sampled this version in his track, entitled &quot;God's Gonna Cut Us Down&quot;, on his album &quot;T.H.R.E.E.&quot;
In a trailer for the Coen brothers's film True Grit.

Other Artists
The single hit number one on the Christian charts after being released by Rick Hendrix and his positive music association. Musician Sean Michel covered the song during his audition on Season 6 of American Idol. Matchbox Twenty also used the song before playing &quot;How Far We've Come&quot; on their &quot;Exile in America&quot; tour. The New Jersey rock band The Gaslight Anthem have done a cover of this song as well. Recently, the Canadian rock band Three Day's Grace has used the song in the opening of their live shows. Bobbie Gentry recorded a version as &quot;Sermon&quot; on her album The Delta Sweete.
Chart positions
Moby version: &quot;Run On&quot;



Chart (1999)
Peak
position




UK Singles Chart
33







Johnny Cash version



Chart (2006)
Peak
position




UK Singles Chart
77







External links

Video for Johnny Cash's version of &quot;God's Gonna Cut You Down&quot; on Yahoo! Music
&quot;God's Gonna Cut You Down&quot; lyrics

References



pl:God's Gonna Cut You Down
Category:Johnny Cash songs Category:Moby songs Category:Gospel songs Category:1999 singles Category:2006 singles



Cinematical - Tony Kaye No Longer Just History↩
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1uIBL_ei5VM↩
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=G4pDgBQv6hk↩


