


Samuel Jared Taylor (born 1951) of Oakton, Virginia, is an American journalist and an advocate of what he describes as &quot;racial realist&quot; explanations for the sociological and economic problems associated with non-whites, particularly black people, in Western countries.1
Taylor is the editor of American Renaissance, a journal that describes itself as &quot;America's premiere publication of racial-realist thought&quot;.2 He is the president of the parent organization, New Century Foundation, and a former director of the National Policy Institute, a Georgia-based think tank. He is a former member of the advisory board of The Occidental Quarterly. Taylor's views have generally been described as racist by academics, political commentators, journalists, and various other organizations.345
Early life
Born to missionary parents in Japan, Taylor lived in that country until he was 16 years old. His parents were conventional liberals, and so was he until the age of 30.6 He graduated from Yale University in 1973 with a BA in Philosophy, and graduated from Institut d'Etudes Politiques de Paris (Sciences Po) in 1978 with a MA in International economics. Taylor speaks fluent English, Japanese and French. In the 1980s, Taylor was West Coast editor of PC Magazine and a consultant before founding the American Renaissance periodical in 1990. Taylor has taught Japanese to summer school students at Harvard University.
Books
He is the author of Shadows of the Rising Sun: A Critical View of the Japanese Miracle (1983) ISBN 0-688-02455-6, in which he wrote that Japan was not an appropriate economic or social model for the United States, and criticized the Japanese for excessive preoccupation with their own uniqueness.
Taylor first turned to race in Paved With Good Intentions: The Failure of Race Relations in Contemporary America (1993) ISBN 0-9656383-4-0,7 in which he argued that racism is no longer a convincing excuse for high black rates of crime, poverty, and school failure. He also edited The Real American Dilemma: Race, Immigration, and the Future of America, (1998) ISBN 0-9656383-0-8.8
Taylor supervised preparation of the New Century Foundation monograph, The Color of Crime (1998, 2005), which cites government statistics showing that blacks and Hispanics commit violent crimes at considerably higher rates than whites, and Asians at lower rates than whites.9 He is the main contributor to a collection of articles from American Renaissance magazine called A Race Against Time: Racial Heresies for the 21st Century, (2003) ISBN 0-9656383-2-410 and editor of a collection of essays by the late Samuel Francis entitled Essential Writings on Race, (2007) ISBN 978-0-9656383-7-1.11
Views
Taylor has summarized the basis for his views in the following terms:

Race is an important aspect of individual and group identity. Of all the fault lines that divide society&lt;U+2014&gt;language, religion, class, ideology&lt;U+2014&gt;it is the most prominent and divisive. Race and racial conflict are at the heart of the most serious challenges the Western World faces in the 21st century... Attempts to gloss over the significance of race or even to deny its reality only make problems worse.12

He has questioned the capacity of blacks to live successfully in a civilized society. In an article on the chaos in New Orleans after Hurricane Katrina, Taylor wrote &quot;when blacks are left entirely to their own devices, Western Civilization&lt;U+2014&gt;any kind of civilization&lt;U+2014&gt;disappears. And in a crisis, civilization disappears overnight.&quot;13 Taylor believes in the direct link between race and intelligence, where blacks are generally less intelligent than whites, and whites are generally less intelligent than East Asians, as expressed in The Bell Curve. Taylor has said in an interview:

I think Asians are objectively superior to Whites by just about any measure that you can come up with in terms of what are the ingredients for a successful society. This doesn't mean that I want America to become Asian. I think every people has a right to be itself, and this becomes clear whether we're talking about Irian Jaya or Tibet, for that matter.14

Taylor has described himself as a &quot;race realist&quot;,15 and espouses a program of white nationalism.
Taylor has made remarks on the growing number of non-whites in Europe, America and Australia. On the greater number of non-whites in Holland compared with Denmark, Taylor has commented; &quot;Europeans travel a lot within Europe, and they see dark-skinned bums sleeping on the streets [in] Rotterdam. In Denmark they don't see dark-skinned bums sleeping on the streets, and they are not so stupid as to be unable to understand that immigration has something to do with this.&quot;16
In January 2005, Taylor reviewed a book by Frank Salter, On Genetic Interests: Family, Ethnicity and Humanity in an Age of Mass Migration, and agreed with Salter that, from an exclusively genetic point of view, an Englishman would be better off resisting the immigration of two hypothetical Bantu immigrants, than he would be to rescue one of his own children from drowning. He also noted that this was an &quot;extreme&quot; conclusion.17 Taylor has also given support to Hans Hoppe's attempts to persuade libertarians to oppose immigration; he generally approves of Hoppe's work, although he sees the pursuit of a society with no government at all to be &quot;the sort of experiment one might prefer to watch in a foreign country before attempting it oneself&quot;.18
In a speech delivered on May 28, 2005, to the British self-determination group, Sovereignty, Taylor said of his personal feelings to interracial marriages, &quot;I want my grandchildren to look like my grandparents. I don't want them to look like Anwar Sadat or Fu Manchu or Whoopi Goldberg.&quot;19
Taylor is somewhat unique among American white nationalists for his opposition to anti-semitism. In his 1983 book Shadows of the Rising Sun , he denounced imperial Japanese links to Nazi Germany. At the American Renessiance group's very first conference, held in Atlanta in 1994, rabbi Mayer Schiller was the dinner speaker. In 1997, he removed Holocaust deniers and neo-Nazis off the groups' e-mail list.20
Praise and criticism

The Southern Poverty Law Center describes Taylor as &quot;a courtly presenter of ideas that most would describe as crudely white supremacist &lt;U+2014&gt; a kind of modern-day version of the refined but racist colonialist of old.&quot;21 A 2005 feature in the Pittsburg Post Gazette described Taylor as &quot;a racist in the guise of expert&quot;22
Paul Gottfried, professor of humanities at Elizabethtown College, also disagrees with what he calls &quot;the value of white nationalism,&quot; but writes: &quot;In comparison to the generally shabby lot of journalists I have known, Jared is a true paragon of tolerance.&quot; He also notes what he calls Taylor's &quot;classical liberal sense of fair play.&quot;23
Mark Potok and Heidi Beirich, writers in the Intelligence Report (a publication of the Southern Poverty Law Center), has written that &quot;Jared Taylor is the cultivated, cosmopolitan face of white supremacy. He is the guy who is providing the intellectual heft, in effect, to modern-day Klansmen.&quot; He has also stated that &quot;American Renaissance has become increasingly important over the years, bringing a measure of intellectualism and seriousness to the typically thug-dominated world of white supremacy&quot;.24
Bibliography





foreworded by Jared Taylor

Footnotes

See also

American Renaissance (magazine)
Racialism
Racial realism
Racial segregation in the United States
Scientific racism
White nationalism

External links

Jared Taylor Jared Taylor's personal website




fr:Jared Taylor (journaliste)
Category:1951 births Category:Living people Category:Alumni of Sciences Po Category:American newspaper editors Category:American white nationalists Category:American anti-illegal immigration activists Category:Yale University alumni



↩
About American Renaissance↩
&quot;Jared Taylor, a Racist in the Guise of 'Expert'&quot;. Dennis Roddy. Pittsburgh Post-Gazette. January 23, 2005.↩
Student Group Hosting Racist Speaker at MSU↩
Conservatives' Voices Enter Clinton's Dialogue on Race↩
American Renaissance↩
Paved with Good Intentions, by Jared Taylor↩
The Real American Dilemma, edited by Jared Taylor (0965638308)↩
http://www.amren.com/newstore/cart.php?page=color_of_crime↩
A Race Against Time (0965638324)↩
Essential Writings on Race, by Sam Francis↩
About American Renaissance↩
American Renaissance News: Africa in our Midst: Lessons from Katrina↩
Carol Miller Swain &amp; Russell Nieli, Contemporary Voices of White Nationalism in America, Cambridge University Press, 2003, p. 102.↩
↩
American Renaissance News↩
American Renaissance News: What We Owe Our People↩
VDARE.com: 12/28/01 - Democracy vs. Freedom (And The Nation-State)? by Jared Taylor↩
Demographic Change In White Western European World Uk Usa↩

http://www.splcenter.org/get-informed/intelligence-files/profiles/jared-taylor↩
Dennis Roddy &quot;Jared Taylor, a Racist in the Guise of 'Expert'&quot; Pittsburgh Post-Gazette (Pennsylvania) Sunday, January 23, 2005 1↩
Paul Gottfried Replies to His Critics↩
↩


