
Charles John Spencer1 (born July 19 1977)2 is an Italian-American professional wrestler better known by his ring name Tony Mamaluke. He is best known for his work with Extreme Championship Wrestling from 2000-2001 and World Wrestling Entertainment in 2006 and 2007.
Career
World Championship Wrestling
After being trained by Dean Malenko,3 Spencer began his wrestling career in 1998, working for independent promotions in Florida under the names C.G. Afi and Casanova Jones. His first big break came during his short stay in World Championship Wrestling (WCW) as Tony Marinara, a New York mobster who managed the team of Big Vito and Johnny the Bull, who became known as The Mamalukes (and later The Paisans). His storyline included a feud with Disco Inferno, who kayfabe owed his &quot;family&quot; money.4 At one point, the feud also involved Lash LeRoux. His last appearance came at the Souled Out 2000 pay-per-view in an interview with Gene Okerlund he said he had to take care of some business and he left, never to appear in WCW again.
Extreme Championship Wrestling
Not long after his release, he started working in Extreme Championship Wrestling. He took on the name Tony Mamaluke, with the last name being a reference to the former tag team he managed in WCW. He joined the Full Blooded Italians group, which consisted of Little Guido and Big Sal E. Graziano. During his stay in ECW, he and Guido captured the ECW World Tag Team Championship from Yoshihiro Tajiri and Mikey Whipwreck on August 25 2000.5 They lost the title, however, on December 3 to Danny Doring and Roadkill.6 During this time, he also feuded with Super Crazy and Kid Kash. He stayed with ECW until the company was declared bankrupt in April 2001.
Independent circuit
After ECW folded, Mamaluke worked for NWA Wildside, Total Nonstop Action Wrestling, and World Wrestling All-Stars, where as part of his gimmick, the ring announcer announced his weight in liquid ounces rather than pounds or kilograms. He then joined Ring of Honor, where he feuded with his former-partner Little Guido and also where he tag-teamed with John Walters as &quot;The Purists.&quot; In late 2003, Mamaluke relocated to Los Angeles to train in martial arts at the New Japan Pro Wrestling Inoki Dojo. He eventually returned to pro wrestling in 2005, winning the ROH World Tag Team Championship with Sal Rinauro in his first match back in Ring of Honor.78 The duo held the belts from October 1 2005 to December 17, when they lost them at Final Battle 2005.910
World Wrestling Entertainment
During 2005, WWE held a reunion ECW show entitled One Night Stand, and Mamaluke appeared with other original Full Blooded Italians at the pay-per-view.111213 In April 2006, WWE decided to revive ECW as a new brand and Mamaluke was among several ECW alumni that signed contracts with WWE to participate as a full time competitors for the new ECW. Mamaluke debuted on June 7 2006 at WWE vs. ECW: Head to Head, participating in the battle royal between ECW and a contingent of RAW/SmackDown! superstars.14
Mamaluke made his pay-per-view debut at One Night Stand 2006, reviving his role as a member of the Full Blooded Italians with Little Guido;15 the duo was accompanied by Big Guido. The duo faced Yoshihiro Tajiri and Super Crazy in tag team action, picking up the victory.16 From there, he continued to team with Guido and was accompanied by Trinity. He only appeared sporadically on ECW on Sci-Fi in losing attempts in both singles and tag team action against the likes of Sabu, The Hardys, Mike Knox, and Test. The Full Blooded Italians appear on pay-per-view once again on December 3, 2006 at December to Dismember in a losing effort to the Knock-Out/Tap-Out Connection (Sylvester Terkay and Elijah Burke).1718
On January 18 2007, Mamaluke was released from his WWE contract with several other wrestlers.1920
Personal life
Spencer married his wife Brooke on August 28, 2003.
In wrestling

Finishing and signature moves21

Sicilian Stretch (Grounded inverted facelock submission)
Sicilian Necktie (Cross armbreaker)
Italian Sleeper (Guillotine choke)
Italian Suplex (High-angle belly to back waist lock suplex)
Sicilian Crab (Over the shoulder single leg Boston crab)
Sicilian Slice (Inverted double underhook facebuster)
Spaghetti Bender (Grounded octopus stretch)
Single arm DDT
Fujiwara armbar
Bridging grounded hammerlock
Bridging Northern Lights suplex
Top rope tornado DDT, sometimes while springboarding



Managers

&quot;The Big Don&quot; Tommy Rich
Big Guido
Trinity
Sal E. Graziano



Entrance Music

Shaddap You Face by Joe Dolce (Indy Circuit)
No Sleep Till Brooklyn by Beastie Boys (as apart of the F.B.I.)
The Rage To Overcome by Machine Head


Championships and accomplishments

Extreme Championship Wrestling

ECW World Tag Team Championship (1 time) - with Little Guido2223

Hardkore Championship Wrestling

2002 HCW Incredible 8 Tournament Semi-Finalist

New Breed Pro Wrestling

New Breed Cruiserweight Championship (1 time)

Ring of Honor

ROH Tag Team Championship (1 time) - with Sal Rinauro242526

Southern Championship Wrestling

SCW Southern Heavyweight Championship (1 time)


Notes

External links


Tony Mamaluke at Online World of Wrestling


it:Charles Spencer
Category:1980 births Category:American professional wrestlers Category:People from Brooklyn Category:Living people Category:Professional wrestling managers and valets



↩



↩

↩
↩


↩
↩
↩
↩
↩

↩
↩
↩
↩








