
Jacqueline DeLois Moore (born January 6, 1964 in Dallas, Texas) is an American actress and professional wrestler. She worked for both World Championship Wrestling and World Wrestling Entertainment, and made history in the latter promotion as the first Black woman to win the WWE Cruiserweight Championship, and as the first African American to win the WWF Women's Championship. Since her release from WWE in 2004, she has focused on her acting career.
Wrestling career
Jacqueline was a professional wrestling fan as a child, and began training under Skandor Akbar after she met him in a gym. She was the only female in his school, preparing her for a career in which she would often wrestle against men. She debuted in 1989 in the Texas-based World Class Championship Wrestling promotion as Sweet Georgia Brown.
United States Wrestling Association
In 1992 Jacqueline moved on to the United States Wrestling Association in Memphis, where she was known as Miss Texas. She became a fixture in the women's division, which she would dominate for four years. She was the first ever USWA Women's Champion, winning the newly created title in a tournament on March 2, 1992. She lost the title to Lauren Davenpot on April 13, and regained the title on August 24. Feuding with Davenport, Moondog Fifi and Leslie Belanger, she held the title two more times in 1992 and three times in 1993. Throughout 1993, she wrestled WWF stars Sensational Sherri and Luna Vachon. She was out of the title picture for much of 1994, only winning the title once, on December 5, but enjoyed four more reigns in 1995. She held the title a thirteenth and fourteenth time in 1996 before losing her final USWA Women's Championship to Tasha Simone on November 4, 1996.
Smoky Mountain Wrestling
In November 1995 Jacqueline made five appearances with Smoky Mountain Wrestling in Kentucky and Tennessee as Sgt. Rock. She defeated Ron Davis in her debut match, then feuded with The Wolfman throughout the remainder of the month.
World Championship Wrestling
Jacqueline began submitting her resume to the Atlanta-based World Championship Wrestling, and was eventually contacted by WCW employee J.J. Dillon, who offered her a contract. She debuted in WCW in January 1997 as the on-screen girfriend of Kevin Sullivan, then feuding with his estranged wife, Woman, and her boyfriend, Chris Benoit. The two couples fought one another until Benoit defeated Sullivan in a retirement match. At Road Wild on August 9, Jacqueline became the valet of Harlem Heat. She later engaged in a brief feud with Disco Inferno, who she defeated in an upset victory at Halloween Havoc 1997 on October 26. Her contract was allowed to expire in 1998.
World Wrestling Federation
Jacqueline vs. Sable
Jacqueline joined the World Wrestling Federation in mid-1998. She debuted as the on-screen girlfriend of the heel Marc Mero and began a feud with Sable, the estranged wife of Mero. After Jacqueline and Sable traded insults on several occasions, Jacqueline challenged Sable to a bathing suit contest. The contest took place on July 26 at Fully Loaded, with Sable winning after she removed her halter top to reveal a painted on bikini top. However, the following evening on RAW, WWF Chairman Vince McMahon disqualified Sable as &quot;body paint does not constitute a bikini&quot;, and Jacqueline was awarded the winner's trophy.
Sable recruited Luna Vachon and the other Oddities to fight Jacqueline for her, and helped Luna pin Jacqueline on the August 10 episode of RAW. After the match, Sable gave the unconscious Jacqueline's trophy to Luna. Jacqueline demanded that the trophy be returned, and faced Sable in an arm wrestling contest on the August 17 episode of RAW. During the contest, Jacqueline broke her grip and pushed the table into Sable's solar plexus, winding her and enabling Jacqueline to retrieve her trophy.
Jacqueline and Mero teamed together to face Sable and a mystery opponent on August 30 at SummerSlam 1998. Sable's partner was revealed to be Edge, but he was sidelined for much of the match as Jacqueline dominated Sable, preventing her from tagging out. After Sable finally managed to tag Edge, he delivered the Downward Spiral to Mero and then placed Sable atop him, thus winning the match for himself and Sable and humiliating Mero by causing him to lose to his wife.
After Sable defeated Jacqueline in an evening gown match on the September 14 episode of RAW, Jacqueline demanded a singles bout with Sable. The resultant match was filmed on September 15 in Sacramento, but broadcast as the September 21 episode of RAW. With the revived WWF Women's Championship on the line (the Women's Championship had been abandoned in January 1996, two months after Alundra Blayze had left the WWF with the title itself and joined WCW, where she was shown dropping the belt into a trash can), Jacqueline defeated Sable after Mero tripped Sable and held her foot down, preventing her from kicking out of Jacqueline's pin.
Jacqueline and Sable continued to feud, with Jacqueline cutting off Sable's ponytail on the October 5 episode of RAW. While Jacqueline enjoyed a strong run as champion, squashing challengers such as Starla Saxton, Mero began to lose more and more frequently. On October 26, Sable challenged Jacqueline to a title match at Survivor Series 1998. The title bout took place on November 15 in the Kiel Center in St. Louis. With Shane McMahon acting as referee, Sable defeated Jacqueline to become the new WWF Women's Champion.
Pretty Mean Sisters
Jacqueline and Mero separated on the November 22 episode of Sunday Night HEAT, and the jilted Jacqueline formed a stable of women known as the Pretty Mean Sisters (or &quot;P.M.S.&quot;) with Terri Runnels, who was separated from her husband, Goldust. During a match between Mero and Goldust on the November 23 episode of RAW, Jacqueline and Terri entered the ring and low-blowed both men.
In January 1999, Terri claimed to have suffered a miscarriage after she was knocked of the ring apron by D'Lo Brown. The guilty Brown essentially became a servant to P.M.S., who humiliated him and forced him to wrestle his friend, Mark Henry. The deception lasted until February 1, when the ringside doctor told Brown that Terri had not been pregnant. P.M.S. then feuded with Brown, costing him matches and attacking his newly debuted manager, Ivory. Jacqueline returned to the women's division in March 1999, and on the April 12 episode of RAW she, Ivory, Tori and Sable took part in a four way match for the Women's Championship. The match was declared a no-contest after Sable's bodyguard Nicole Bass stormed the ring and chokeslammed the three challengers.
P.M.S. gained a &quot;Love slave&quot;, Meat, in May 1999. In the same month the stable expanded once more to incorporate Ryan Shamrock, who had been spurned by the womanizing Val Venis. Shamrock left both the stable and the WWF in the following months, while Terri and Jacqueline assisted Meat in his matches. Tension began to grow between the two women as Terri exhausted Meat with hours of sex before his matches, then berated her fatigued lover when he lacked the energy to win matches, and Jacqueline left the stable after Terri forced Meat to kiss her feet on the August 1 episode of Sunday Night HEAT.
Solo career
On the September 6 episode of RAW, Jacqueline faced the misogynistic Jeff Jarrett in advance of his WWF Intercontinental Championship match with Chyna. Jarrett squashed Jacqueline, choking her with the ring ropes, forcing her to submit with the figure four leglock and breaking a guitar over her head.
Jacqueline soon returned to her pursuit of the Women's Championship, which she failed to win from Ivory in a three way hardcore match which also included Luna on November 18. On November 25, Jacqueline defeated Ivory in a &quot;gravy bowl match&quot; to win the Golden Ladle Trophy. At Armageddon 1999 on December 12 she took part in a four way evening gown match for the Women's Championship, but was stripped following a combined assault from her opponents, Ivory, Miss Kitty and B.B.. On January 23, 2000 at the Royal Rumble, Jacqueline entered the &quot;Miss Royal Rumble&quot; swimit contest, which was won by Mae Young.
Jacqueline won the WWF Women's Championship for a second time on February 1 in the Joe Louis Arena in Detroit, defeating Harvey Whippleman (who had won the belt from Miss Kitty while in drag and calling himself &quot;Hervina&quot;) in a very short match. Her reign lasted throughout February and March, with Jacqueline defeating Ivory and Lita to retain the title, until March 30, when she was challenged by Stephanie McMahon. The inexperienced Stephanie defeated Jacqueline following extensive interference from D-Generation X.
Jacqueline's requests for a rematch were denied, and she lost a battle royal for the number one contendership to Lita. On the July 2 episode of Sunday Night HEAT, WWF Light Heavyweight Champion Dean Malenko challenged &quot;anyone with enough manhood&quot; to face him. After Jacqueline came to the ring, Malenko explained that he had said &quot;manhood, not somebody from the hood.&quot; Jacqueline was granted a title shot, but submitted to Malenko's Texas cloverleaf.
Throughout August and September, Jacqueline feuded with WWF Women's Champion Lita, aligning herself with Edge and Christian to counter the presence of Lita's constant companions, The Hardy Boyz. She received further title shots on October 9 and November 2, but failed to unseat Lita on both occasions.
The A.P.A.
The Acolyte Protection Agency (Faarooq and Bradshaw) recruited Jacqueline on the December 18 episode of RAW, asking her to take care of Trish Stratus while they fought Stratus' clients, T &amp; A. In the resultant six person tag match, Jacqueline pinned Stratus. On the December 21 episode of SmackDown!, Jacqueline challenged Right to Censor member Ivory to a title match. After the other members of R.T.C. distracted Jacqueline and enabled Ivory to pin her, the A.P.A. repaid the favor by saving Jacqueline from a group beating after the match.
The feud between the A.P.A. and R.T.C. continued throughout early-2001, and culminated in a match at WrestleMania X-Seven on April 1 which pitted R.T.C. (Bull Buchanan, The Goodfather and Val Venis) against The A.P.A. and Tazz. In the early stages of the match, Jacqueline DDT'ed Steven Richards, the leader of R.T.C. who had accompanied them to ringside. R.T.C. lost the match after Bradshaw pinned The Goodfather.
Tough Enough
In mid-2001, Jacqueline, along with Tazz, Al Snow and Tori, became a trainer on the MTV reality TV series Tough Enough.
The Invasion and its aftermath
In late-2001, Jacqueline remained loyal to the WWF throughout The Invasion, feuding with Alliance members Stacy Keibler, Torrie Wilson, Ivory and Mighty Molly. She took part in the six pack challenge for the vacant WWF Women's Championship on November 18 at Survivor Series 2001 which was won by Trish Stratus. Several weeks later, Jacqueline challenged Trish for the title at Vengeance 2001. Due to Trish's relative inexperience, Jacqueline dominated the match but was surprised by a backslide pin costing herself victory and another championship reign. Jacqueline and Trish did shake hands before and after the match, in a show of good sportsmanship.
Referee
In 2002, Jacqueline became a referee, with her debut match being a Women's Championship bout between Jazz and Trish Stratus at the 2002 Royal Rumble. At WrestleMania X8 she refereed a match pitting Mr. Perfect, Lance Storm and Test against Scotty 2 Hotty, Albert and Rikishi on the Sunday Night HEAT pre-show. Jacqueline wrestled infrequently throughout 2002, receiving several title shots, none of which she was successful in. In late 2002 she and Trish Stratus began a feud with Victoria and Jazz, which culminated in a four way match for the title at Judgment Day on May 18, 2003 which was won by Jazz. She took part in a battle royal for the title on June 30, which was won by the debuting Gail Kim.
Cruiserweight Champion
Jacqueline appeared very seldomly throughout late 2003 and early 2004, spending some of her time working as a trainer in Ohio Valley Wrestling. On the May 6, 2004 episode of SmackDown! in Tucson, Arizona, WWE Cruiserweight Champion Chavo Guerrero, Jr. issued an open challenge for anyone to face him for his title, a challenge which was answered by Jacqueline. Jacqueline defeated Chavo in an upset victory. Jacqueline was defeated by Chavo's father, Chavo Classic, in a non-title match on the May 13 episode of SmackDown!, and on May 16 at Judgment Day 2004 she lost the Cruiserweight Championship to Chavo Guerrero, Jr. in a match in which Chavo's arm was tied behind his back.
In June 2004, Jacqueline was released from World Wrestling Entertainment.
Total Nonstop Action Wrestling
Jacqueline appeared at the November 7, 2004, Total Nonstop Action Wrestling pay-per-view TNA Victory Road 2004, where she lost to Trinity. She made a second appearance with TNA on December 5 at TNA Turning Point 2004, where she refereed a match between Pat Kenney and Johnny B. Badd and Johnny Swinger and Glenn Gilberti. Jacqueline cost Gilberti the match by kicking him in the groin after he shoved her, enabling Badd to hit him with the TKO and pin him. In 2006 Jacqueline wrestled some house shows for TNA.
Independent circuit
On June 25, 2005 at the Independent Association of Wrestling event &quot;Clash at the Cove&quot; in South Bend, Indiana, Jacqueline defeated Crystal Carmichael and Vanessa Harding in a three way match for the newly created IAW Women's Championship.
Acting career
In late-2004, Jacqueline was cast in the movie Knight Fever as a tough detective known as &quot;Evil&quot; Venus Jackson.
On January 20, 2006, Jacqueline was interviewed by Prowrestling.com and she said that she really wants to get back in the ring and is hoping to go overseas to be booked in some matches. She also says that she is keeping in shape by training in the ring.
Jacqueline appears in Ethan Dettenmaier's Sin-Jin Smyth, scheduled for release in October of 2006. She plays V.M &quot;The Engine&quot; Sexton.
In wrestling
Finishing and signature moves

Various DDTs:

:*Flowing DDT
:*Tornado DDT
:*Diving DDT

Spear
German suplex
Lou Thesz press
Martial arts kicks
Missile dropkick
Sidewalk slam
Spinning kick
Single-leg Boston crab
Dropkick
Swinging neckbreaker
Headscissors takedown

Managers

Jim Cornette
Terri Runnels
Ryan Shamrock

Wrestlers managed

Booker T
Bradshaw
Faarooq
Meat
Marc Mero
Stevie Ray
Kevin Sullivan
Mark Henry

Championships and accomplishments

Taekwondo

:*Third degree black belt

Professional wrestling

:*Independent Association of Wrestling
::*IAW Women's Champion (1 time)
:*United States Wrestling Association
::*USWA Women's Heavyweight Champion (14 times)
:*Universal Wrestling Federation
::*UWF Women's World Champion (1 time)
:*World Wrestling Entertainment / Federation
::*WWE Cruiserweight Champion (1 time)
::*WWF Women's Champion (2 times)
References

Biography at Reality News Online.com
Interview with Chris Paulson
Interview with Steve Gerweck
Interview with Tom Conway
Jacqueline at Gerweck.net
Jacqueline at OWOW.net
Smoky Mountain Wrestling results for November 1995
The USWA Women's Championship at Wrestling Titles.com
The WWF Women's Championship at Wrestling Titles.com
TNA house show results

External links

Jacqueline fansite

fr:Jacqueline Moore
Moore, Jacqueline Moore, Jacqueline Moore, Jacqueline Moore, Jacqueline Moore, Jacqueline Moore, Jacqueline Moore, Jacqueline Moore, Jacqueline Moore, Jacqueline Moore, Jacqueline Moore, Jacqueline Moore, Jacqueline
