
Marc Coleman was 1 Economics Editor of Newstalk 106 to 108 and a commentator for the Sunday Independent newspaper. He has been criticised for his opposition to workers being unionised, and for his inaccurate claims regarding the Dublin Lock-out.2
Early life
Coleman was born in Dublin but lived as a child in Erlangen, Bavaria before returning to Ireland in the mid-1970s. He was a member of Fine Gael in the late 1980s and early 1990s.
A graduate of the Kiel Institute for the World Economy, Coleman also holds both a scholarship MBA and Master's degree from University College Dublin and a primary degree from Trinity College, Dublin.
Career
Coleman became Newstalk's Economics Editor in 2007 after working for The Irish Times between 2005 and 2007.3 He now also writes for Ireland's largest Sunday paper, the Sunday Independent, broadcasts a weekly current affairs programme &quot;Coleman at Large&quot; on Newstalk 106-108fm and regularly speaks at public events.
Coleman's publications prior to joining The Irish Times included articles in the ESRI Quarterly Economic Commentary, the Jesuit publication Studies, Administration magazine and Magill magazine.
The Best is Yet to Come
In 2007 he published The Best is Yet to Come. The book forecast the continued growth in the Irish economy as well as a sustainable construction Industry for the years ahead. As of 2011, Ireland was in deep recession with the virtual collapse of the construction Industry, rising unemployment and zero growth rate throughout the economy. On his late night talk show, &quot;Coleman at Large&quot;, he has repeatedly stated that his predictions are still valid and that he is looking forward to 2020. He has not expanded on this opinion. Late in 2009, Coleman published &quot;Back from the Brink&quot; in which Coleman prescribed policies that he argued would accelerate economic recovery in Ireland and the world, largely identical with the policies he had advocated before the economic collapse. One of these policies included multi-generational mortgages as a way to spread Ireland's debt burden over time.
Style
Common topics for discussion on his radio shows on Newstalk are: religion in Ireland, the liberal bias of the media and the lack of a conservative party in Ireland. He has stated that as a statistician he does not trust the majority of polls that claim to represent public opinion.4
References


External links

Official Website

Articles by Marc Coleman

2005 article in the Sunday Business Post
Article in Studies on &quot;God and the European Constitution&quot;
Irish Bank Officials Association quotes a Coleman article in a press briefing
Commentary on House Prices for the Daft Report Q2 2006
Multi-generational mortgages




Category:Year of birth missing (living people) Category:Living people Category:Former officers of the University Philosophical Society Category:Irish economists Category:Newstalk presenters Category:Sunday Independent (Ireland) people Category:The Irish Times people



http://www.independent.ie/entertainment/tv-radio/tom-dunne-shunted-to-late-night-slot-as-pat-kenny-comes-in-29514072.html↩
↩
ireland.com - The Irish Times - Fri, May 04, 2007 - Rival coalitions still poles apart↩
Coleman at Large, Newstalk, April 24th↩


