

Microsoft Visual Studio Express is a set of freeware integrated development environments developed by Microsoft that are lightweight versions of the Microsoft Visual Studio 2008 (codenamed Orcas) product line. The idea of express editions, according to Microsoft, is to provide a streamlined, easy-to-use and easy-to-learn IDEs for less serious users, such as hobbyists and students. The final versions were released on November 19, 2007. In line with popular demand since the Visual Studio 2005 Express Editions1, these editions will always remain free-of-charge. Visual Studio 2008 Express Editions require Windows XP or a later Windows version; Windows NT 4.0, Windows 2000 and Windows 9x are no longer supported. Visual Studio 2005 Express Editions can be installed on Windows 2000 SP4.
Products
Visual Studio Express consists of the following separate products:

Visual Basic (.NET) 2008 Express Edition
Visual C# 2008 Express Edition
Visual C++ 2008 Express Edition
Visual Web Developer 2008 Express Edition
SQL Server 2008 Express Edition (to be released in the first half of 2008)

Microsoft Visual J# 2005 was not updated for this release and is currently not planned. The version shipping with Visual Studio 2005 will be supported until 2015 as per the product life-cycle strategy.
Visual Basic Express
Despite the fact that it is a stripped-down version of Visual Studio, some improvements were made upon Visual Basic 2008 from Visual Basic 2005. Visual Basic 2008 Express includes the following improvements over Visual Basic 2005 Express:

Includes the visual Windows Presentation Foundation designer codenamed &quot;Cider&quot;
Debugs at runtime
Better IntelliSense support

Fixes common spelling errors
Corrects most invalid syntax
Provides suggestions to class names when specified classes are not found


The Express Edition has the following limitations:2

No IDE support for databases other than SQL Server Express and Microsoft Access
No support for Web Applications with ASP.NET (this can instead be done with Visual Web Developer Express, though the non-Express version of Visual Basic allows both web and windows applications from the same IDE)
No support for developing for mobile devices (no templates or emulator)
No Crystal Reports
Fewer project templates (e.g. Windows services template, Excel Workbook template)
Limited options for debugging and breakpoints.

Visual Web Developer Express
The Visual Web Developer Express is a freeware web development tool that allows developers to evaluate the web development and editing capabilities of the other Visual Studio 2008 editions at no charge. Its main function is to create ASP.NET websites.
It has a WYSIWYG interface, drag-and-drop user interface designer; enhanced HTML &amp; code editors; a (limited) database explorer; support for other web technologies (e.g., CSS, JavaScript, XML); and integrated, design-time validation for standards including XHTML 1.0/1.1 and CSS 2.1. Visual Web Developer 2008 Express includes a new integrated HTML designer based on Microsoft Expression Web.
Being an Express IDE, it lacks certain features, such as the Accessibility Checker, the ability to create standalone Class Library Projects (which can be done by the other language-specific Express Editions), the extensibility support necessary to load third-party add-ins and macros and some other features. 3
Visual C++ Express
Due to the popularity of this freeware compiler, numerous popular programming libraries have been or are being modified to compile under this, including Irrlicht and Valve's Source engine.
The Visual C++ 2008 Express Edition can be used to compile .NET as well as Win32 applications immediately after installation. However, natively compiling 64-bit applications through the IDE is not supported. If the freely available Windows SDK is installed, 64-bit applications can be built on the command line using the x64 cross-compiler (Cl.exe) supplied with the SDK. 4
Visual C++ 2008 Express does not include MFC, ATL, OpenMP support, or 64-bit compilers, nor does it include a resource editor. The higher-end commercial editions of Visual Studio, specifically the Professional and Team Suite editions, have these features.5
Visual C# Express
The list of breakpoints where the user could control the breakpoint features has been removed, so that now the user can only toggle breakpoints.
The following refactoring modes were also removed:6

Encapsulate field
Promote local to parameter
Reorder parameters
Remove parameters
Extract interface

This effectively reduces the refactoring capabilities of Visual C# Express to Renaming and Extracting Methods.
Developers state the reason of this removal as &quot;to simplify the C# Express user experience&quot;. However this created a controversy as some end users claim it is an important feature, and instead of simplifying it cripples the user experience.7
The ability to attach the debugger to an already-running process has also been removed, hindering scenarios such as writing Windows services and re-attaching a debugger under ASP.NET when errors under the original debugging session cause breakpoints to be ignored.
SQL Server Express

SQL Server Express is a freeware, light-weight, and redistributable edition of Microsoft SQL Server. It provides an integrated data storage solution for developers writing Windows applications and Web sites that have basic data storage needs. SQL Server Express replaces MSDE 2000 and significantly expands on its feature set.
The SQL Server Management Studio Express can also be downloaded to provide a graphical user interface for administering SQL Server Express.
The Express Edition has the following limitations:8

Limited to one physical CPU
Lack of enterprise features support
One GB memory limit for the buffer pool
Databases have a 4 GB maximum size9
No Data mirroring and/or clustering
No profiler tool
No workload throttle
No UI to import/export data to table

See also

Microsoft Visual Studio

References



External links

Microsoft Visual Studio Express Official Website
Compare MSDN Subscriptions 2008
Microsoft Visual Studio Express - FAQ
Visual Studio Product Line Feature Comparisons
Microsoft Visual Studio Express 2005 SP1 Download
Manual Installation Instructions for Express Editions2005 2008
Visual Studio 2008 Express Editions Beta 2 website
Microsoft Visual Express Edition 2005 Update for Windows Vista


fr:Microsoft Visual Studio Express ru:Visual Studio 2005 Express
Category:Integrated development environments Visual Studio Express Category:Microsoft development tools



↩
↩
Which features are missing from Visual Web Developer Express: Mikhail Arkhipov's blog↩
How to: Configure Visual C++ Projects to Target 64-Bit Platforms↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩


