
Kathleen Megan Folbigg (n&lt;U+00E9&gt;e Donovan) (b. June 14, 1967) is an Australian serial killer, convicted of murdering her three infant children, eight-month old Patrick Allen, ten-month old Sarah Kathleen and nineteen-month old Laura Elizabeth. Folbigg was also convicted of the manslaughter of a fourth child, Caleb Gibson, aged 19 days. Her killing spree would last from 1991 until 1999,1 coming to an end only when her husband discovered her personal diary which detailed the killings.2
Originally sentenced to forty years imprisonment, with a non-parole period of thirty years, Folbigg's sentence was reduced to thirty years imprisonment with a non-parole period of twenty-five years on appeal.3 Folbigg maintains her innocence, claiming her four children all died from natural causes.
Early life
On January 8, 1969, Kathleen's natural father, Thomas John Britton, murdered her mother, also named Kathleen, by brutally stabbing her twenty four times. Following her father's arrest on the day following the murder, Kathleen was made a ward of the state and placed into foster care with a Mr and Mrs Platt.
One year later, at the age of three, Kathleen displayed behaviour which concerned her carers, simulating sex play and at times masturbating. She appeared to have a preoccupation with her sex organs, signs of previous abuse from her father. On July 18, 1970, Kathleen was removed from the care of the Platts and placed into Bidura Children's Home.4
In September, 1970, Kathleen moved into the home of Mr and Mrs Marlborough, a couple who also provided foster care and expressed a desire to adopt Kathleen. She was not told of her mother's murder at the hands of her father until 1984. She left the home of the Marlborough's and met Craig Gibson Folbigg in 1985. The pair formed a relationship and purchased a home in the north-western Newcastle suburb of Mayfield in May, 1987 and married in September that same year.5
Murder of Caleb Gibson
Caleb Gibson Folbigg was born a healthy baby on February 1, 1989. On February 20, 1989, Kathleen put Caleb to sleep in a room adjoining the room she shared with her husband. Caleb was known to breathe noisily, and was diagnosed by a paediatrician to be suffering from a mild case of laryngomalacia, something he would eventually grow out of.6
During the night Caleb stirred from midnight until 2am. Kathleen attended to her baby's cries and smothered her baby. A diagnosis of sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS) was put forth as the cause of Caleb's death.7
Murder of Patrick Allen
Patrick Allen Folbigg was born on June 3, 1990. Craig Folbigg remained at home to help care for his wife and baby for three months after the birth. On October 17, 1990, Kathleen put Patrick to bed. Craig Folbigg was woken by the sounds of his wife screaming, and found her standing at the baby's cot. He noticed his child wasn't breathing, and attempted to revive him by attempting cardiopulmonary resuscitation. An ambulance was called and Patrick was taken to hospital. Patrick would later be diagnosed to be suffering from epilepsy and cortical blindness.8
On February 13, 1991, Kathleen telephoned her husband at work, saying &quot;It's happened again!&quot;. She had smothered Patrick.9
Murder of Sarah Kathleen
The couple moved to Thornton in the City of Maitland. Sarah Kathleen Folbigg was born on October 14, 1992, and on August 29, 1993 was smothered by her mother.10
Murder of Laura Elizabeth
In 1996 the couple had moved to Singleton. On August 7, 1997, Laura Elizabeth Folbigg was born. On February 27, 1999 Laura was killed.11

Image:Folbigg_Caleb.jpg|Victim #1:
Caleb Gibson Folbigg, died aged 19 days Image:Folbigg_Patrick.jpg|Victim #2:
Patrick Allen Folbigg, murdered, aged eight months Image:Folbigg_Sarah.jpg|Victim #3:
Sarah Kathleen Folbigg, murdered, aged ten months Image:Folbigg_Laura.jpg|Victim #4:
Laura Elizabeth Folbigg, murdered, aged nineteen months

Trial
Folbigg's trial lasted seven weeks in total. During a replay for the jury of Folbigg's interview with police, she attempted to run from the court room.12
Prosecution
The prosecution alleged Folbigg murdered her four children by smothering them in periods of frustration.
Defence
Folbigg relied on the defence that all four of her children had died from natural causes and denied that the contents of her diary related to the killing of her children.


The appellant did not kill her children or harm Patrick... She did not think Craig was responsible for their deaths... There were natural explanations for the events, such as Sudden Infant Death Syndrome and, in the case of Laura&lt;U+2019&gt;s death, myocarditis. The appellant in fact was a caring mother, who, for example, always kept her children clean and tidy and was attentive to their appointments with doctors. Many of her diary entries in fact showed that she was concerned as a parent and enjoyed being a parent, something that was noticed by Craig and other witnesses at various times and passed on to the police during their investigations.13




There was no direct statement of responsibility for a death and it is understandable how a mother would blame herself in the appellant&lt;U+2019&gt;s situation, even though she was not responsible. There was no &lt;U+2018&gt;failure to thrive&lt;U+2019&gt; by the children, apart from Patrick&lt;U+2019&gt;s difficulties with epilepsy and blindness, and they were well-nourished and cared for. The appellant appeared to be utterly distraught when the ambulance officers, the former police officer Mr. Saunders and others came to the house after the deaths of the children.14


Verdict
On May 21, 2003 Folbigg was found guilty by the Supreme Court of New South Wales jury of three counts of murder, one count of manslaughter and one count of maliciously inflicting grievous bodily harm. On October 24, 2003, Folbigg was sentenced to forty years imprisonment with a non-parole period of thirty years.15
Appeal
On February 17, 2005 the court reduced her sentence to thirty years imprisonment with a non-parole period of twenty-five years on appeal. Due to the nature of her crimes Folbigg resides in protective custody.


In order to protect her from the danger of murder by other inmates the authorities will have to keep her closely confined for the whole of her time in custody. The number of people with whom she will have contact will be limited. So far she has been locked up for twenty-two hours in every twenty-four and the indications are that some such regime will obtain indefinitely.16


References

Further reading

When the Bough Breaks: The True Story of Child Killer Kathleen Folbigg, Matthew Benns ISBN 1-86325-423-4

External links

Kathleen Folbigg Crime Library article




Category:1967 births Category:1991 crimes Category:Australian murderers of children Category:Australian prisoners and detainees Category:Australian serial killers Category:Female serial killers Category:Living people Category:Parents who killed their children Category:Australian female murderers Category:Prisoners and detainees of New South Wales



↩

↩


↩





↩






