
The University of Delaware (colloquially &quot;UD&quot; or &quot;UDel&quot;) is the largest university in Delaware. The main campus is in Newark, with satellite campuses in Dover, Wilmington, Lewes and Georgetown. It is medium-sized &lt;U+2013&gt; approximately 16,000 undergraduate and 3,500 graduate students. Although UD receives public funding for being a land-grant, sea-grant, space-grant and urban-grant state-supported research institution, it is also privately chartered.1 At present, the school's endowment is valued at about $1.3975 billion US. The University of Delaware is ranked 68th by US News in the category of &quot;Best National Universities.&quot; 1 In 2009, UD ranked No. 22 in the in-state category of Kiplinger's Personal Finance magazine's list of the 100 Best Values in Public Colleges, and No. 18 for out-of-state.2
The school from which the university grew was founded in 1743, making it one of the oldest in the nation. However, UD was not chartered as an institution of higher learning until 1833. Its original class of ten students included George Read, Thomas McKean, and James Smith, all three of whom would go on to sign the Declaration of Independence.
The school has renowned engineering, science, business, education, urban affairs and public policy, public administration, agriculture, history, chemical engineering, chemistry and biochemistry programs, among others, drawing from the historically strong presence of the nation's chemical and pharmaceutical industries in the state of Delaware. In 2006, UD's engineering program was ranked number 10 in the nation by The Princeton Review. In 2009, US News and World Report, ranked the chemical engineering program 10th among undergraduate programs and 9th among graduate programs. It is one of only four schools in North America with a major in art conservation. UD was the first American university to begin a study abroad program.3
Organization and student body

Aerial View of the University of Delaware's Green

The university is organized into 7 colleges:

College of Agriculture and Natural Resources
College of Arts and Sciences
Alfred Lerner College of Business and Economics
College of Earth, Ocean and Environment
College of Engineering
College of Health Sciences
College of Education and Public Policy

The College of Arts and Sciences is the largest of the colleges. Also, on April 3, 2007 the second annual BusinessWeek review of the &quot;Best Undergraduate B-Schools&quot; ranked UD's Lerner College of Business and Economics 29th among the nation's top 58 public university programs and 61st among the 500 schools earning international accreditation from the Association to Advance Collegiate Schools of Business.3
In recent years, the student body has been labeled as one of the most politically apathetic in the nation. Although there are a number of activist student groups on campus, the University was ranked 4th out of 361 schools in the &quot;Election? What Election?&quot; category in the Princeton Review's 2007 college ratings 4.
This perception is quickly changing however, and such rankings have not gone unnoticed by university officials. An April 2008 report by the school's Strategic Planning Committee identified student engagement in the &quot;social, cultural, artistic, and scientific challenges of our age&quot; as one of the university's primary long-term goals5. University students have also responded to the charges of student apathy, and the 2007-2008 academic year saw the creation of a number of student organizations aimed at increasing political dialogue amongst undergraduates 6.
The 2008 Presidential Election has also brought much attention to the University and has increased student involvement in political activism. In August 2008, the University was hailed as the &quot;epicenter&quot; of the presidential election by Bloomberg News 7. Joe Biden (D), Delaware, who graduated from the University, was elected Vice President of the United States on November 4, 2008 as Barack Obama's running mate. In addition, Biden's wife, Jill, as well as David Plouffe, Obama's campaign strategist, and Steve Schmidt, McCain's campaign strategist all graduated from UD. Senator Biden appeared at the University in a campaign rally on October 31, 2008, just days before the election, in front of an estimated crowd of 7,000.
Students and Admissions



University of Delaware Facts




Class of 2012 Applicants


Class of 2012 Enrolled


Class of 2012 Middle 50% HS GPA


Class of 2012 Middle 50% SAT, Avg ACT


Freshman Class Size


Class of 2012 Gender


Number of Study Abroad Locations


Undergraduate Colleges


Academic Offerings


Undergraduate Student-Faculty Ratio






8 The student body at the University of Delaware is largely an undergraduate population. The University of Delaware offers over 100 undergraduate degrees, and due to the vast number of academic options many students complete dual degrees as well as double majors and minors. Delaware students have a great deal of access to work and internship opportunities. An easily accessible online database contains over 1,000 internship opportunities available for all majors. The Center hosts 15 major career fairs with over 500 employers in attendance and the Campus Interview Program, which brings over 600 employer representatives to campus. Like other corporate players that call Delaware home, MBNA (now Bank of America) invests in the UD community through the construction of the new Career Services Center building, the hiring of students, and sponsorship of scholarships. With Delaware's location in Newark, Delaware, students are able to land jobs and internships in Delaware, as well as in New York, Philadelphia, Wilmington, Baltimore, and Washington, D.C.. More than 90% of Delaware graduates who do not go directly to graduate school report finding full-time positions within six months of graduating.9
Additionally, &quot;4+1&quot; Accelerated Programs also allow students to pursue both their bachelor's and master's degrees within a five-year period. Opportunities in the College of Human Services, Education and Public Policy exist to acquire a bachelor's in leadership and a master's in public administration. Students may also pursue a bachelor's degree in hotel management and a master's in business administration through a &quot;4+1+1&quot; program where students work for one year between the undergraduate and graduate experiences. Students in the College of Engineering can pursue a bachelor's degree in one of the University's engineering disciplines and a master's in business administration.
The Medical Scholars Program is an opportunity for academically competitive students who wish to pursue careers in the medical profession. Successful participation in the Medical Scholars Program leads to a Bachelor of Arts in Liberal Studies from the University of Delaware and the M.D. degree from Jefferson Medical College in Philadelphia.
The Ronald McNair Post-Baccalaureate Achievement Program is an initiative to prepare and empower low-income, first generation college students and underrepresented students (of African American, Latino, and Native American descent) for doctoral study; allowing them to complete a Baccalaureate degree, enroll in graduate school, and ultimately attain a doctoral degree. Since its inception at Delaware, the program boasts a 100% placement rate of its scholars in graduate programs across the country.
Lastly, the Dean's Scholar Program is designed to serve the needs of a highly selective group of students who are motivated and talented and have a clear view of their long-range educational goals. Dean's Scholars are granted flexibility in college requirements so that they can build their entire program with faculty advisers and create original programs of study, including off-campus experiences and independent research. This opportunity is available to outstanding sophomores in the Colleges of Arts and Science, Agriculture and Natural Resources, Health and Nursing Sciences, and Education and Public Policy.
Colleges
Alfred Lerner College of Business and Economics
The college offers Baccalaureate degrees in Accounting, Economics, Finance, Management, Management Information Systems, Marketing, and Operations Management. Minors in Business Administration, Economics, International Business, and Management Information Systems. A Certificate in Business Fundamentals is also offered to non-business majors. As of July 2008, the department of Hotel, Restaurant and Institutional Management was moved from the College of Education and Public Policy and to the Alfred Lerner College of Business and Economics.
Graduate degrees offered include Accounting, Management Information Systems, Business Administration (MBA), Organizational Effectiveness, and Economics. Dual degrees offered: MBA/MA: Economics; MBA/MS: Information Systems &amp; Technology Management; MBA/MS: Organizational Effectiveness, Development &amp; Change; and MBA/MS: International Business. (The latter degree is offered in conjunction with Groupe ESC Grenoble, France). An Executive MBA is offered at the University's Wilmington campus. Ph.D. offered in Economics.10
The Lerner College of Business and Economics has received many awards in the past. Most notably, in 2008 the Lerner College was ranked 60th in the nation in Business Week's Best Undergraduate Business Schools.11 In 2009 it was ranked 6th in the mid-atlantic region for its part-time MBA program and 38th in the nation.
College of Arts and Sciences
Through the College of Arts and Sciences at the University of Delaware students can choose from a vast array of concentrations. They can choose from programs in visual and performing arts, social sciences, natural sciences and many more. Listed below are some of the programs offered and the different departments within each program.12


Arts and Humanities

Art Conservation
Art History
English
Fine Arts &amp; Visual Communications
Foreign Languages &amp; Literatures
Music
Philosophy
Theater
Communication


Social Sciences and History

Anthropology
Communication
History
Military Science - Army ROTC
Political Science &amp; International Relations
Sociology &amp; Criminal Justice


Natural Sciences and Mathematics

Biological Sciences
Chemistry &amp; Biochemistry
Computer &amp; Information Sciences
Geography
Linguistics
Mathematical Sciences
Neuroscience
Physical Therapy
Physics &amp; Astronomy
Psychology


College of Agriculture and Natural Resources
 Also known as &quot;the Ag School&quot;, the College of Agriculture and Natural Resources is committed to addressing issues in animal and plant biology including health, welfare, and production issues, and to environmental stewardship. This is done through the educational programs, the research, and the outreach to communities. The college values hands-on learning experiences for students and faculty. Independent research projects, service learning, and study abroad programs abound, and the faculty are a rich resource committed to learning, personal development, and shared discovery.

Agricultural Education
Animal &amp; Food Sciences
Bioresources Engineering
Entomology &amp; Wildlife Ecology
Food &amp; Resource Economics
Plant &amp; Soil Sciences

College of Engineering
The University of Delaware College of Engineering traces its beginnings to 1837, when a class in &quot;surveying and leveling&quot; was first taught at Newark College. Civil engineering became part of the science curriculum in 1850, but degree programs were not established until 1889 for Civil Engineering, 1891 for Mechanical and Electrical Engineering, and 1914 for Chemical Engineering. In the early 1920s, the University of Delaware was known primarily for its engineering school, with more than half of the institution's entire student body enrolled in one of the four engineering disciplines. Long recognized for its emphasis on teaching, the College of Engineering endeavored to establish strong research and graduate programs as well. World War II brought the first significant funding for research, setting a new pattern for the institution. By 1960, Chemical Engineering's graduate education and research initiatives had earned the department national prominence. In the early 1970s, the Mechanical Engineering department became one of the first in the country to teach composite materials, leading to the creation of the internationally recognized Center for Composite Materials 4. The new interdisciplinary research center created a unique model for industry cooperation and led the College to establish eight more research centers over the next 30 years. Materials Science, founded in 1960 as a program, was established as the College's fifth department in 1998. Today, the College of Engineering continues a proud tradition of excellence in research, teaching and service that has brought prestigious national accolades to both faculty and students.

Center for Composite Materials
Chemical Engineering
Civil Engineering
Computer Engineering
Electrical Engineering
Environmental Engineering
Materials Science
Mechanical Engineering

College of Health Sciences
The College of Health and Nursing Sciences was formed July 1, 1997 as a result of a merger between the College of Nursing, the College of Physical Education, Athletics, and Recreation, and the department of Nutrition and Dietetics. It was renamed to the College of Health Sciences on July 1, 2005. There are about 130 faculty and staff in the College and about 1600 students. The College consists of the Departments of Health, Nutrition, and Exercise Sciences and Medical Technology, the School of Nursing, and the Division of Special Programs. In addition, some of the faculty in this College participate in the interdisciplinary Biomechanics and Movement Science program. The College offers nine undergraduate degrees and five graduate degrees with eight different areas of concentration.
College of Education and Public Policy
The college's research and public service centers annually provide research expertise and educational services to thousands of individuals from hundreds of organizations and agencies. Students work with faculty and staff on virtually all of these efforts, gaining valuable practical experience that complements their academic studies.
The Center for Applied Demography &amp; Survey Research provides demographic and survey data and information on important public issues to researchers and policymakers at all levels in addition to the Center for Community Research and Service which assists public, nonprofit and private organizations in Delaware to design, implement, and evaluate policies and programs that address the needs of low and moderate income families and communities related to economic development, housing and social services.
The Institute for Public Administration (IPA) is a college center that addresses the policy, planning, and management needs of its partners through the integration of applied research, professional development, and the education of tomorrow&lt;U+2019&gt;s leaders.
Also in this college is the Center for Disabilities Studies. It focuses on improving the quality, quantity, and range of public and private services and supports available in Delaware for individuals with disabilities and their families.
Center for Energy &amp; Environmental Policy, the Center for Historic Architecture &amp; Design, the Delaware Center for Teacher Education and the Delaware Education Research &amp; Development Center are all affiliated with this college.
Traditional academic units include the School of Education, the School of Urban Affairs and Public Policy, The Department of Human Development and Family Studiers and the Department of Fashion Studies.
Majors include:

Apparel Design
Early Childhood Education, includes early childhood special education
Educational Studies
Elementary Teacher Education, includes Middle School and Special Education
Fashion Merchandising
Human Services
Human Services, Education and Public Policy
Leadership
Public Administration (MPA Only)
Public Policy
Urban Affairs and Public Policy (MA/PhD Only)

College of Earth, Ocean, and Environment
The undergraduate component of the College is currently housed within the Department of Geological Sciences where students can major in Earth Science Education or Geology. Geology majors can undertake concentrations in Paleobiology or Coastal and Marine Geoscience. Students may also major in Environmental Science, a collaboration between the departments of Geological Sciences, Geography and Biological Sciences. Environmental Science majors can select several concentrations including the Geological Environment or the Marine Environment. There are also marine studies courses that are open to undergraduate students. These range from introductory classes for non-science majors to advanced programs for science and engineering majors.
Divisions and institutes
Disaster Research Center
The Disaster Research Center, or DRC, was the first social science research center in the world devoted to the study of disasters. It was established at Ohio State University in 1963 and moved to the University of Delaware in 1985. The Center conducts field and survey research on group, organizational and community preparation for,response to, and recovery from natural and technological disasters and other community-wide crises. DRC researchers have carried out systematic studies on a broad range of disaster types, including hurricanes, floods, earthquakes, tornadoes, hazardous chemical incidents, and plane crashes. DRC has also done research on civil disturbances and riots, including the 1992 Los Angeles unrest. Staff have conducted nearly 600 field studies since the Center&lt;U+2019&gt;s inception,traveling to communities throughout the United States and to a number of foreign countries, including Mexico,Canada, Japan, Italy, and Turkey. Faculty members from the University's Department of Sociology and Criminal Justice direct DRC's projects. Professor Sue McNeil is Director. Core Faculty Benigno E. Aguirre, Joanne Nigg and Tricia Wachtendorf. Russell R. Dynes and E. L. Quarantelli, the founding directors of DRC, are Emeritus Professors. The staff also includes postdoctoral fellows, graduate students, undergraduates and research support personnel.
Delaware Biotechnology Institute
The Delaware Biotechnology Institute, or DBI, was organized as an academic unit of the University of Delaware in 1999 and moved into dedicated research facilities in 2001. DBI supports a statewide partnership of higher education, industry, medical, and government communities committed to the discovery and application of interdiscplinary knowledge in biotechnology and the life sciences. With some 180 people resident in the DBI facilities, including 20-25 faculty members representing 12 departments, 140 graduate and post-graduate students, and 20 professional staff members, DBI emphasizes a multi-disciplinary approach to life-science research. The core research areas pursued by DBI-affiliated faculty include agriculture, human health, marine environmental genomics, biomaterials, and computational biology/bioinformatics. Research in these and other areas is done in collaboration with faculty at Delaware State University, Delaware Technical and Community College, Wesley College, Christinia Care Health Systems, and Nemours Hospital for Children. One of the primary objectives of the Institute is to provide state-of-the-art research equipment to facilitate life science research and six core instrumentation centers and specialized facilities, each under the direction of an experienced researcher or administrator, is supported at DBI and made available to University researchers.
Delaware Environmental Institute
The Delaware Environmental Institute (DENIN) launched October 23, 2009. DENIN is charged with conducting research and promoting and coordinating knowledge partnerships that integrate environmental science, engineering and policy. 5
University of Delaware Energy Institute
The University of Delaware Energy Institute (DEI) was inaugurated September 19, 2008. DEI has been selected to receive a $3 million a year grant for advanced solar research. 6
History
The University of Delaware traces its founding to 1743, when Presbyterian minister Francis Alison opened up his &quot;Free School&quot; in his home in New London, Pennsylvania. The school changed its name and location several times, ending up as the Academy of Newark in 1769 (chartered by the colonial government). Since Delaware was part of the Pennsylvania colony until 1776, the academy was denied charter as a college in order to prevent its competing with the University of Pennsylvania (then known as the College of Philadelphia). In 1833, the General assembly for the State of Delaware passed the &quot;An Act to Establish a College at Newark&quot;, and the next year, Newark College opened. It changed its name in 1843 to Delaware College and it merged with the Academy of Newark. The school closed from 1859 until 1870 (Newark Academy separated from the college in 1869). On March 28, 1921, by another act of state assembly, it merged with the nearby Delaware Women's college (founded in 1913) to form the University.
On October 23, 2009 the University of Delaware signed an agreement with Chrysler to purchase a 272-acre closed vehicle assembly plant adjacent to the University for expansion for $24.25 million as part of Chrysler's bankruptcy restructuring plan.13
Security
The University recently implemented a system named UD Alert, to alert students and faculty of emergencies on campus by sending text, voice, and e-mail messages to the individuals 7. The University was also one of the original campuses in the country to implement the &quot;blue light&quot; emergency phone system in the late 1980s.
Residence Life controversy
In October 2007, the Office of Residence Life's diversity program was criticized by several students, and faculty as well as the Foundation for Individual Rights in Education (FIRE) for infringing on students rights. FIRE argued that residence hall programs, one on ones and floor meetings administered through resident assistants forced students into accepting &quot;university-approved ideologies.&quot; FIRE specifically criticized programs dealing with issues of sexual identity, race, and sustainability.89 The controversy originated from training programs given to resident assistants that suggested all white people were inherently racist, and because minorities were not in the majority, they could not be racist. The program was suspended on November 1, 2007, with university president Patrick T. Harker quoted as saying, &quot;There are questions about its practices that must be addressed and there are reasons for concern that the actual purpose is not being fulfilled.&quot;10 In May 2008, against some student protest, the University reinstated an amended version of the previous program. 11 The National Association of Scholars(NAS), an education reform group, and an early critic of the Residence Life program, called the amended version a repackaging of the original program. Said the NAS: &quot;The submission is essentially a repeat of its predecessor program. Some of the text has been re-worded but its meaning remains unchanged.&quot;14 The program was also criticized by Wall Street Journal commentator Naomi Schaeffer Riley.12 Riley, among other things, criticized loose definitions of environmental sustainability that include &quot;Fair Trade&quot;, &quot;Affirmative Action&quot;, &quot;Multicultural Competence&quot; and &quot;Domestic Partnerships&quot;.15
Architecture
 In 1891, prominent Philadelphia architect Frank Furness designed Recitation Hall.16
The recent history of the university has been marked by massive construction projects. North or Laird Campus, formerly home to the Pencader Complex, has been entirely redesigned and renamed Independence Complex. This began with the construction of a Marriott Courtyard run by the HRIM (Hotel Restaurant and Institutional Management) department. Three new residence hall buildings have also been built and named after the three University Alumni who signed the Declaration of Independence, George Read, Thomas McKean and James Smith (who signed for Pennsylvania). The third Delaware signer, Caesar Rodney, already had a dorm complex named after him on West Campus. A fourth residence hall opened for the Fall of 2008, named Independence Hall; the building is split into East and West wings.17
New academic buildings have also been constructed recently. In 2006, the Center For The Arts had its grand opening, with new facilities for the school's music and theater programs. Also in 2006, Jastak-Burgess Hall opened, now home to the Department of Foreign Languages and Literature. In 1998, Gore Hall opened on the Green and connects to Smith Hall via an overpass on South College Avenue. Other recent construction projects include Alfred Lerner Hall (for business) and massive renovations to DuPont Hall, Wolf Hall, and Memorial Hall.
Administration
The University is currently headed by its 26th President Patrick T. Harker, who was formerly dean of the Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania. Previous President David P. Roselle retired at the end of the 2006&lt;U+2013&gt;2007 academic year.18 President Roselle had held that post for sixteen years. Prior to Roselle, the President was E.A. Trabant.
Roselle's 2006 salary of $979,571 was the highest of any public university president in the United States (Purdue University President Martin C. Jischke's 2006 salary was second, at $880,950).19 
Study abroad
The University of Delaware was the first American university to begin a study abroad program, which was later adopted by many other institutions.20 The program began when Professor Raymond Watson Kirkbride took a group of 9 students to Paris, France during the fall semester of 1923. Since this initial trip, the University of Delaware has expanded its study abroad program, which now encompasses over 75 different programs in more than 40 subjects to over 35 countries on all seven continents making it one of the largest programs in the country. As of 2006-2007, approximately 45% of all Delaware undergraduate students take advantage of study abroad experiences prior to completing their baccalaureate degrees.
Delaware's study abroad program offers many options for students. Undergraduates have the option of studying abroad for a five-week winter session, or an entire semester.
Athletics

 The athletic teams at Delaware are known as the Fightin' Blue Hens with a mascot named YoUDee. YoUDee is a Blue Hen Chicken, after the team names and the state bird of Delaware. YoUDee was the 2002 UCA National Mascot Champion and was elected into the mascot hall of fame in 2006.
UD offers 23 varsity sports, which compete in the NCAA Division-I (FCS for football). Delaware is a member of the Colonial Athletic Association (CAA) in all sports. Delaware was a member of the Atlantic 10 Conference in football until the 2006 season. Football is the most popular and most successful sport at Delaware. The Fighting Blue Hens football teams have won Six National Titles, including the 2003 NCAA I-AA Championship. In 2007, the Delaware Blue Hens were the runners up in the NCAA I-AA National Championship game, but were defeated by (defending champions) Appalachian State.
Former head football coaches Bill Murray, Dave Nelson and Harold &quot;Tubby&quot; Raymond are College Football Hall of Fame inductees. Delaware is one of only two schools to have three straight head coaches inducted into the College Football Hall of Fame (Georgia Tech is the other).21 Delaware's only other NCAA National Championship came in 1983 for Women's Division I Lacrosse.22
The Blue Hens have won three CAA Championship, since joining in 2001 (although unofficially the women's rowing team has won the CAA title four times since 2001, placing second the other two times). One each for the women's 2004 field hockey team, the 2007 men's lacrosse team and the 2007 women's volleyball team. The 2007 men's lacrosse program reached the final four of the NCAA Tournament for the first time in its history.
Intrastate competition
In November, 2007, it was announced that the University of Delaware and Delaware State University would have their first game against each other, the game being in the first round of the NCAA Division I Football Championship Subdivision playoffs. The game was played on November 23, with University of Delaware winning 44-7.23
Fight Song
The Fight Song first appeared in the Student Handbook in 1933.24 It was composed by alumnus George F. Kelly (Class of 1915).


And then we'll fight! fight! fight! for Delaware,

Fight for the Blue and Gold,

And when we hit that line,

Our team is there

with a daring spirit bold

And when we strike with might

Let foes beware

Our glorious name we'll uphold

And then we'll fight! fight! fight! for Delaware,

Fight for the Blue and Gold,

Delaware will shine to-night,

Delaware will shine.

When the sun goes down and

the moon comes up,

Delaware will shine.

And then we'll fight! fight! fight! for Delaware...

[repeat]


Figure Skating


Gore Hall

Music
The University of Delaware has a variety of musical performance opportunities available to students, including a wind ensemble, orchestra, symphonic band. There are also a number of jazz groups available, including two large ensembles, and a smaller group that focus on improvisation. All ensembles are open by audition to all students at the university, and can be taken either for credit or for no credit. The school also has a steel drum ensemble, and an early music ensemble. There are also a variety of choral ensembles, including the University of Delaware Chorale, an all-women's choir, and three choirs, also open to community members, that constitute the Schola Cantorum. The music department's home is the Amy E. Dupont Music Building, named for Amy Elizabeth du Pont, a prominent benefactor of the University during the early 20th century.
In addition, the University of Delaware is known for having one of the best marching bands on the east coast, the University of Delaware Fightin' Blue Hen Marching Band. The band ranges from 300 to 350 members every year and can be seen performing at every home football game as well as at various festivals and competitions, including the Collegiate Marching Band Festival in Allentown, PA. Additionally, the marching band was selected to perform in the 56th Presidential Inaugural Parade in 2009.25
In 2006, the new Center for the Arts building opened. This building has a number of recital halls and a large number of practice rooms, most with upright pianos. The practice rooms are locked and cannot be used by students who are not music majors or in an official UD ensemble. The university employs a tiered access system, with larger rooms and rooms with grand pianos being reserved for certain groups of students. In addition the music department also uses their old building, with offices, classrooms, practice rooms, and recital halls. This building has public-access practice rooms with pianos.
In 2004, the University of Delaware Chorale, under the direction of Dr. Paul D. Head and accompanied by Betsy Kent, were invited to perform at the American Choral Directors Association's International Convention in Los Angeles. In April 2007, the Chorale won the Grand Prix at the Tallinn International Choral Festival, having scored higher than 40 other choirs from around the world. In 2000, the music department purchased an 18th century Ceruti violin for professor and virtuoso violinist Xiang Gao. This investment of nearly $300,000 USD has more than tripled in value. Recently Prof. Gao has been granted use of a Stradivarius Violin.
The University also has a student run radio station, 91.3 WVUD.
Technological innovations
In 2000, the University of Delaware was ranked the 2nd most &quot;wired&quot; university in the country by Yahoo! Internet Magazine. The university earned this title with the help of over 700 miles of fiber optic cable which runs throughout the campus.
The university has also been listed on the list of the top 10 most &quot;wireless&quot; universities in the country. Wireless connections are available in all major areas of the university including the library, dining halls, student centers, residence hall lounges, and most classroom buildings.
Deployed in 2009, The University of Delaware now offers secure (encrypted) wireless access to students.
Student media
 There are currently three student newspapers at Delaware: The Review, the Lamplighter, and the Mainstreet Journal.
The Review is a weekly publication, released in print on Tuesdays and an online-only edition on Fridays. It is the school's official paper and is written with support from the University. It is distributed at several locations across campus, including Morris Library, the Perkins Student Center and the Trabant University Center, as well as various academic buildings and the dining halls. It is also distributed in the surrounding community, including newsstands and shopping centers near campus. The Review's office is located at 250 Perkins Student Center, facing Academy Street, and is above the offices of WVUD. In 2004, it was a National Newspaper Pacemaker Award Finalist, and was also named one of the ten best non-daily college newspapers by the Associated Collegiate Press.26 They currently have a print circulation of 11,000.
The Lamplighter is a semesterly publication. It is an independent student paper written without support from or restriction by the University's administration. The Mainstreet Journal focuses on creative writing.
The student-run, non-commercial, educational radio station at Delaware broadcasts on 91.3 and uses the call letters WVUD, which the University purchased from the University of Dayton in the 1980s. Although not its intended call letter pronunciation, 'VUD has taken on the slogan &quot;the Voice of the University of Delaware.&quot; They are licensed by the city of Newark, Delaware and broadcasts with a power of 1,000 watts 24 hours a day with its offices and studios located in the Perkins Student Center.27
The transmitting facilities are located atop the Christiana East residence hall. WVUD is operated by University of Delaware students, a University staff of two, and community members. No prior radio experience is necessary, nor is there a need to enroll in any certain major to become a part of WVUD. The radio station has a variety of programming, featuring both music and talk formats.
In 2002, DEconstruction Magazine was formed &quot;to create a forum for student writing that fell outside of journalism or creative writing. Traditionally, DEconstruction focused on an editorial style of writing to discuss everything from politics to pop culture.&quot;28
Another student magazine, aUDio, was announced in Fall 2007. They aim to be &quot;the University of Delaware's first online music magazine.&quot; 29 To celebrate their launch, there was a concert on November 29, 2007, in the Trabant University Center.
STN is the student-run, non-commercial, educational television station at the University of Delaware. The station broadcasts second-run movies, original student produced content as well as live sports coverage. The initials, STN, originally stood for Shane Thomas Network, later changed to Student Television Network.30
UDress Magazine is the on-campus fashion magazine which publishes one issue per semester, in conjuncture with fashion events.
Greek life
Approximately 15% of Delaware's undergraduate population is affiliated with a fraternity or sorority. There are over 19 fraternities and 15 sororities (chapters &amp; colonies) in the Interfraternity Council (IFC), National Panhellenic Conference (NPC), and National Pan-Hellenic Council (NPHC). They all coordinate via the Greek Council. All Greek organizations participate in an accreditation process called the Chapter Assessment Program (CAP). CAP ratings award chapters with either a Gold, Silver, Bronze, Satisfactory or Needs Improvement designation. This system is an expansion from the Five Star program of the late 1990s, requiring contributions to community service, philanthropy, university events, diversity education, professional education, a chapter/colony GPA greater than or equal to the all men's or all women's average, and attendance and compliance with numerous other criteria.
Active Fraternities include Alpha Epsilon Pi, Kappa Sigma, Sigma Alpha Epsilon, Alpha Gamma Rho, Lambda Chi Alpha, Sigma Pi, Alpha Phi Alpha, Phi Beta Sigma, Sigma Phi Delta, Delta Sigma Phi, Phi Gamma Delta, Sigma Phi Epsilon, Iota Phi Theta, Phi Sigma Kappa, Sigma Chi, Kappa Alpha Order, Phi Sigma Pi, Theta Chi, Kappa Alpha Psi, Pi Kappa Phi, Zeta Beta Tau, and Kappa Delta Rho.
Active Sororities include Alpha Delta Pi, Alpha Xi Delta, Sigma Alpha , Alpha Epsilon Phi, Chi Omega, Sigma Kappa, Alpha Phi, Delta Gamma, Phi Beta Chi, Alpha Kappa Alpha, Delta Sigma Theta, Zeta Phi Beta, Alpha Sigma Alpha, and Kappa Alpha Theta.
Alcohol abuse
A campus website claims that a 1993 study by the Harvard School of Public Health found that high-risk drinking at UD exceeded the national norm. On this survey, a majority of students reported binge drinking more than once in a two-week interval. The average consumption for students was nine drinks per week, while 29% reported that they drink on 10 or more occasions per month. Ironically, UD students were found to be more aware of policies, prevention programs, and enforcement risks than the national average.31
In 2005, on the Newark campus of the university 1140 students were picked up by the campus police for alcohol-related violations. Of these, 120 led to arrests. These figures are up from previous years, 1062 in 2004 and 1026 in 2003.32 This represents approximately 6% of the student population.33 Caution must be used in interpreting these figures; a higher number of reported violations may represent more enforcement, not necessarily more actual violations.
UD has expended considerable effort and financial resources to reduce the drinking problem on campus; in 1991 UD founded the Center for Drug and Alcohol Studies. One of the center's major initiatives is a collaborative plan to reduce irresponsible drinking at UD, called &quot;A Matter of Degree&quot;34
Beginning in the fall of 2006, incoming freshman had to complete an online course, AlcoholEdu.
At least one student organization has undertaken the goal of &quot;providing fun activities for those who chose not to drink&quot; and to &quot;promote the idea that one doesn't need alcohol to have a good time.&quot;35
In November 2008, an 18 year old Freshman, Brett Griffin, died of alcohol poisoning at an off campus fraternity party. Griffin was pledging the Sigma Alpha Mu fraternity, and was encouraged to drink an entire bottle of &quot;Southern Comfort&quot; before being assigned a fraternity brother.36 Six UD students have been arrested and charged, and the Griffin family is currently suing the fraternity.
Notable current and former faculty

Alumni


References


External links



Official website






cs:University of Delaware de:University of Delaware fa:&lt;U+062F&gt;&lt;U+0627&gt;&lt;U+0646&gt;&lt;U+0634&gt;&lt;U+06AF&gt;&lt;U+0627&gt;&lt;U+0647&gt; &lt;U+062F&gt;&lt;U+0644&gt;&lt;U+0627&gt;&lt;U+0648&gt;&lt;U+06CC&gt;&lt;U+0631&gt; no:University of Delaware nn:University of Delaware simple:University of Delaware
Category:Newark, Delaware Category:1743 establishments Category:Colonial Athletic Association Football Conference Category:Educational institutions established in the 1740s Category:Land-grant universities and colleges * Category:Colonial Athletic Association Category:Atlantic 10 Football Conference Category:Eastern Pennsylvania Rugby Union Category:Oak Ridge Associated Universities Category:Association of Public and Land-Grant Universities Category:Middle States Association of Colleges and Schools



UD Catalog - General Information↩
Kiplinger.com↩
2↩
http://www.princetonreview.com/college/research/rankings/rankingDetails.asp?CategoryID=5&amp;TopicID=42↩
http://www.udel.edu/strategicplanning/SPC_Report_Apr_08.pdf↩
Student Organizations - Special Interest↩
http://www.udel.edu/udaily/2009/aug/politics082808.html↩
↩
↩
Welcome to the Alfred Lerner College of Business &amp; Economics | University of Delaware↩
Undergraduate B-School Profiles↩
sci.udel.edu/departments/ss-h.html↩
http://www.delawareonline.com/apps/pbcs.dll/article?AID=2009910240360↩
NAS - The National Association of Scholars :: Press Releases↩
Heaven Sustain Us: Environmentalists Have Taken Over the Dorms - WSJ.com↩
Recitation Hall from Philadelphia Architects and Buildings↩
University of Delaware Facilities Website - Residence Halls Information↩
↩
Chronicle of Higher Education, 20 November, 2006↩
Study abroad celebrates 75th anniversary↩
Tubby Raymond named to College Football Hall of Fame↩
NCAA.com - The Official Web Site of the NCAA↩
↩
UD Fight! Song↩
UDaily article: University's marching band selected for inaugural parade↩
The Review↩
Welcome to WVUD!↩
About &lt;U+00AB&gt; DEconstruction Magazine↩
aUDiomag.org↩
Student Television Network↩
Bishop, Binge Drinking in College↩
Crime Statistics↩
Facts and Figures↩
A Matter of Degree↩
copland.udel.edu↩
http://www.nbcphiladelphia.com/news/local/Family-Sues-Sigma-Alpha-Mu-Fraternity-Over-Sons-Death.html↩


