 The early life of Keith Miller, an Australian Test cricketer and Australian rules footballer, spans the period from his birth on 28 November 1919 until 20 August 1940, when he joined the Militia (army reserve) during the Second World War. Miller's early life was dominated by his interest in sport. The youngest of four children of Scottish descent, Miller joined his siblings in being inculcated with a love of sport by his father, playing football in winter and cricket in summer. Miller's father emphasised the importance of technique over power; Miller needed the former as he was of small stature in his childhood and could not rely on brute strength. Due to his size, Miller yearned to be a horse racing jockey.
Miller received his secondary education at the academically selective Melbourne High School, where his mathematics teacher was the then Australian cricket captain Bill Woodfull. Miller neglected his studies and was academically poor, but he excelled at sports. He made the school's First XI cricket team at the age of 14 and gained attention for his technical and defensive ability, which was compared to that of Woodfull. He was rejected by the St Kilda Cricket Club so he signed up for South Melbourne in district cricket, making his debut at the start of the 1935–36 season, still only 162 cm tall. He went on score a rearguard 61 in a low-scoring match against Woodfull's Carlton team, prompting Woodfull to award him a silver eggcup during maths class. It remained one of his most treasured possessions.
In the following year, Miller grew 28 cm (11 in) and began to play cricket and football with more power. Leaving school at the end of year ten, he played cricket for the Victorian Colts for two seasons, before breaking through for his first-class debut late in the 1937–38 season. He played sporadically until making his Sheffield Shield debut during the 1939–40 season and scoring his maiden century. During this time, Miller played exclusively as a batsman. Miller's football career also took off. He played for the Brighton Football Club in the Victorian Football Association for three years starting in 1937, mainly as a defender. At the start of his fourth season, he restricted Bob Pratt, regarded as the best forward of the time, to one goal, and was promptly signed by the St Kilda Saints to play in the leading Victorian Football League in 1940, where the Saints' came second to last.
Birth
Born in the western Melbourne suburb of Sunshine on 28 November 1919, Keith Ross Miller was the youngest of Leslie (Les Sr) and Edith (Edie) Miller's four children.1 Miller had two elder brothers and an sister. Gladys was 12 when Miller was born, while Les Jr and Ray were nine and seven respectively.2 He was named after the Australian pioneer aviator brothers Ross and Keith Smith, who were half-way through their historic flight from England to Australia at the time Miller was born.34 Miller's two Christian names reflected his Scottish heritage; his father's family originated from the dock area of Edinburgh and Dundee.5 Miller's paternal grandfather had come to Australia in April 1849.6 The family lived in a one-level terrace house in Sunshine, which at the time was a separate town of 900 people, eleven kilometres west of Melbourne. The town was dominated by the farm machinery maker H. V. McKay. Miller's father was originally a teacher in Warracknabeal in rural Victoria, before working for McKay in Ballarat until a transfer brought him to Sunshine.7
Early schooling
Sunshine offered open fields, and the three Miller boys quickly took a liking to sport in their childhood, playing Australian rules football in winter and cricket in summer. Their father had been a player for Warracknabeal, winning a premiership in the local league in 1900. Les taught the boys to play with a side-on stance and underlined the importance of correct batting technique.8 He reminded his sons to use a high leading elbow.9 They were taught to rely on a solid defence, concentration, and self-control in the mould of the leading Victorian and Australian Test batsman of the era, Bill Ponsford.10 Miller began his schooling in Sunshine, where he quickly became known for his diminutive height, being one of the smallest children in the school.11 At the age of seven, Miller's family moved to the inner-eastern middle-class Melbourne suburb of Elsternwick, where his parents had purchased a two-storey house with a spacious garden for the children to play sport. By this time his elder brothers had given him the derisive nickname Weedy.12 Miller's small size and his age deficit to his brothers meant that he conceded a strength advantage in backyard cricket matches. This forced him to develop his technique rather than rely on power, which held him in good stead for his future playing. Whenever Miller managed to dismiss his brothers to earn himself some batting time, he typically played with a straight bat in a watchful manner. Miller and his friends would loiter outside Ponsford's home, just 400 m (1310 ft) away, in the hope of catching a glimpse of their hero.13 Like Miller in the backyard, Ponsford was known for his powers of concentration, having scored two quadruple centuries in first-class cricket.14 Miller often practised for hours by himself, putting a tennis ball inside a stocking before suspending it from a clothes line and hitting it back and forth.15
A small child, Miller's major sporting aspiration was to be a jockey; he also played cricket and Australian football.16 At the age of 12, he played for an under-15 Victorian schoolboys cricket team captained by Merv Harvey, which played in Queensland.17 At the time, he stood only  and wielded a sawn-off bat.18 His shots did not go a long way, but he impressed observers with the manner in which he moved his feet and stroked the ball.19 Miller's small stature in a contact sport such as football forced him to rely on physical courage, something for which he was known.20 However, his lack of growth in childhood made him turn to horseracing. Caulfield Racecourse was only a short ways away from the family home, and Miller spent many early mornings watching the trainers and jockeys go about their routines. Miller eventually persuaded his father to let him take horseriding lessons.21 Aside from being attracted to the culture of racing, Miller felt that as he appeared destined to be a small person, a successful career as a jockey was more likely than cricket or football.22
Melbourne High School
 He went to the local state school before transferring to Melbourne High School, a selective school, at the start of 1934.23 The school's emphasis on scholastic and sporting excellence and its culture was more in line with that of a private school.24 Australian Test captain Bill Woodfull was on the teaching staff as Miller's mathematics teacher.25 Miller was a mediocre student, as he did little study and focused his energy on sport.26 In addition to cricket and football, he also played baseball and competed in swimming. This disappointed Woodfull, a disciplined man who invoked the school motto, which meant Honour the Work and exhorted his students to work hard as Australia was attempting to emerge from the depths of the Great Depression.27 Despite being Australia's captain, Woodfull refused to involve himself in coaching the school's cricket teams, feeling that it would intrude on the responsibilities of the sports teachers. Despite this, Woodfull watched the students at cricket training and quickly noticed Miller's skills.28 Miller, aged 14 and still under , was selected in the school's First XI. With his pads flapping against his stomach and sporting a sawn-down bat, Miller batted at No. 6 and scored 44 on his senior debut, and although his lack of power was obvious, his control and solidity prompted the spectators to call him the Unbowlable, the same nickname which was accorded to the similarly strong defensive style of Woodfull. Melbourne went on to win the match.29 Miller impressed his captain Keith Truscott, who fought for his selection and took him under his wing.30 Truscott was later to become an ace fighter pilot in the Royal Australian Air Force, and Miller would follow him into to air force as well. Truscott's social influence also compounded the distractions from Miller's study. He failed all eight of his subjects at the end of 1934, with an average mark of 25%, and was the class dunce. He scored zero in his final exam for Woodfull's geometry class.31 As a result, Miller was forced to repeat year 9.32
Club cricket
 Truscott took Miller to a try out with St Kilda at the start of the 1934–35 season, but Miller could not find a place in any of its five teams.33 Joining the local sub-district cricket club Elsternwick, he did not get to bat or bowl in his first match, and was then dropped to the Second XI for his poor fielding.3435 Nevertheless, the former Victorian state player Hughie Carroll spotted Miller's talent and lured him to the rival South Melbourne club.36 However, Elsternwick prevented him from playing for Souths, so he continued playing in the seconds for Elsternwick.37 In the meantime he continued playing for his school, with steady results, scoring 30 and 25 in two matches against Melbourne's main rival University High School. A relaxing of the zoning rules allowed Miller to start playing for South Melbourne in the following season.38 However, the rules required South Melbourne to play him in their First XI or St Kilda could reclaim him, so he made his district cricket debut for South at the start of the 1935–36 season after a trial in the nets.39 At this stage, he was just  tall—the Test batsman Keith Rigg recalls his first encounter with Miller in a district match: 
It was at South Melbourne that he met Ian Johnson and Lindsay Hassett, his future Australia team-mates and captains. Miller scored only 12 not out batting at No. 7 on debut against St Kilda, but observers felt he would succeed if he could physically grow.40 Miller passed his exams at the end of 1935 and continued his improvement on the field. He began to develop a leg break and googly and represented his school against a visiting schoolboy team from Ceylon. Miller scored an unbeaten 28 to prevent a loss and later claimed that the experience had helped broaden his horizons towards other cultures.41 Assisted by cross-training in baseball, his fielding improvement saw him placed in the slips and he was named as Melbourne High School's cricket sports champion for 1936.42 Miller had averaged 86 with the bat and taken 13 wickets at an average of 9.23, including innings figures of 7/29 against St Kevin's and 3/5 against University High.43 This prompted Woodfull to write in the school magazine that &quot;Miller has Test possibilities&quot;.44
 In March, he played for South Melbourne against Carlton, captained by Woodfull. South Melbourne batted first and collapsed to 5/6.45 The sixth wicket fell at 32 and Miller came to the crease. He guided his team to 141, putting on a stand of 65 in 95 minutes with the last man and finishing with 61. He had struck four boundaries in a 147-minute innings.46 The crowd of 14,000, the largest of the season, gave Miller a standing ovation, and newspapers compared him to Ponsford and Alan Kippax.47 Carlton went on to win the game, and when it was obvious that this was the case, Miller's captain let him bowl for the first time and he took his first wicket in district cricket when Test paceman Laurie Nash took a high-leaping catch.48 Miller's performance prompted Carlton to donate a silver eggcup as a memento &quot;for sterling performance&quot;. Woodfull presented Miller with the trophy during algebra class.49 It was one of the few trophies from his sporting career that he kept in later life.50
During 1936, Miller underwent a sudden growth spurt, including a three month period in which he lengthened by .51 He began to play football in a more physical and aggressive manner and developed the ability to leap high and take airborne marks.52 He increase in size allowed him to become the longest kicker in the school team. Having grown  in a year, upon his return to South Melbourne the following season, he was unrecognisable to Lindsay Hassett.53 Eventually, Miller reached  in height, thwarting his ambition to be a jockey although he never lost his love for the racetrack.54
Representative beginnings
At the start of the 1936–37 season, he was selected for the Colts, a state under-21 team that played at district level.55 At the end of the 1936 school year, he completed year 10, passing five of his eight subjects. Disinclined towards heading to university, he left school without finishing his Leaving year and took a position as a clerk for a car business. Miller felt confident that he could make a career out of sport and therefore felt that further education was unnecessary.56
Miller spent the 1937–38 season with the Colts and won the team's batting trophy for having the best average with 340 runs at 42.50. Across the entire competition, he had the eighth highest average.5758 He scored three half-centuries and a 102 against Northcote.59 At this stage, he was a solid, slow and steady batsman, who accumulated his runs gradually, but The Age predicted that his physical growth would open his horizons, opining &quot;Once he fills out—he is rather tall for his weight—Miller should become a brilliant, aggressive batsman&quot;.60 In early February, late in the summer, he made his first-class debut for Victoria as an 18-year old and hit 181 in 289 minutes against Tasmania at the Melbourne Cricket Ground.61 With his increased power, he began to loft the ball over the infield and struck five fours.62 In 1938–39, he rejoined South Melbourne and played four first-class matches for Victoria, scoring 125 runs at an average of 25.00. However, he was yet to play in the Sheffield Shield competition but only in one-off matches against other teams.6364 In the two matches against Tasmania in December 1938, Miller took his first catch but managed only four, seven not out and three, and he spent a period of time outside the team.65 He was then recalled in March 1939, late in the season, for two matches against Western Australia in Perth, scoring 111 runs at 37.00,66 notching his first first-class fifty in the second innings of the first match with 55.67
He achieved more success as a footballer after following his brothers Les and Ray in joining the Brighton Football Club in the Victorian Football Association (VFA) in 1937.68 A defender, Miller played his first two seasons on the flanks, as he was yet to reach his physical peak and lacked the power to play in central defensive positions until his third year in 1939.69 At this stage, he was unable to hip and shoulder his opponents and relied on his running ability and accurate kicking.70
 In 1939–40, Miller was selected to make his Sheffield Shield debut, against South Australia at Adelaide Oval.71 Batting at No. 4, Miller came to the crease at 2/9 after a top-order collapse, but managed only four before being caught by future co-writer Richard Whitington from the bowling of Harold Cotton.7273 When Victoria fielded, Miller ran out his future Invincibles captain Don Bradman, the first time that Bradman had been caught short of his ground in first-class cricket.74 He also took his first catch at Shield level, that of Mervyn Waite.75 In the second innings, he managed seven before being bowled by leg spinner Clarrie Grimmett,76 who had been one of the world's leading bowlers in the 1930s.77 One of Miller's teammates was Percy Beames, who happened to be his manager at Vacuum Oil, where he had moved from his first job.78 Miller scored 41 and 47 not out in his second match against Queensland, top scoring in the second innings as his team completed a seven-wicket victory.79 Miller retained his place for the match against New South Wales, but was out for 14 in both innings, having difficulties against leg spin, falling once to Bill O'Reilly and the other time to Cec Pepper.80 In the return match against South Australia, Miller decided to take the initiative against Grimmett, charging down the wicket to drive the leg spinner. He featured in a 165-run partnership with Hassett, at times bluffing Grimmett by moving forward before leaning back after the bowler had adjusted his length. Miller reached 108, his first century in Shield competition. He was given out caught by Bradman from Garth Burton, after a disputed catch in which he asked the umpires if he had hit a bump ball.8182 Nevertheless, Bradman praised Miller's innings.83 Apart from the century, Miller had an average season, making 37, one and 24 in his remaining innings to end with 298 runs at 29.80.84 He did not bowl during the season.85
Breakthrough into the VFL
In 1940, Miller started his fourth season in the VFA. In a match against Coburg, regarded as one of the strongest teams in the competition, he was assigned to man the greatest forward of the era, Bob Pratt.86 Pratt had scored 678 goals in ten seasons for South Melbourne in the Victorian Football League (VFL), the top tier of football, and had scored more than 100 goals in each of the last three seasons.87 Miller managed to restrict Pratt to one goal for the match and was named as the best on ground. In the third quarter of the match, Miller restricted him to two marks, and in the fourth quarter, he prevented Pratt from getting a single kick. Scouts from the VFL club St Kilda signed Miller on the spot.88 Upon Miller's signing, The Age opined that he &quot;is one of the most promising players ever to enter league ranks, and can be played anywhere in defence. It was he who kept Bob Pratt to one goal in last week's Association match&quot;.89
At the time, World War II had broken out and by mid-1940, France, Belgium and The Netherlands had fallen to Nazi Germany. Australia had declared war on Germany and Miller wanted to join the military, but St Kilda told him that if he was deployed outside Victoria, his career would be in jeopardy. As a result, Miller postponed his enlistment until the end of the season.90
Playing as a defender, Miller debuted for St Kilda in their fifth round home game against Carlton, at the Junction Oval on 25 May, playing on the half-back flank. Immediately upon the start of the game, his opponent Ron Cooper king hit him, resulting in concussion. Miller said of the experience, &quot;I learnt more in a second or two than I would have in a year&quot;.919293 When St Kilda next met Carlton in the return match at Princes Park on 17 August,94 Miller shoulder bumped Cooper in the first minute of the match, forcing his opponent to leave the field.95 In a match against Richmond, Miller was targeted by its renowned enforcer Jack Dyer, known as Captain Blood. However, Dyer slipped and missed.96 In one match, Miller was reported to showing dissent to a goal umpire, but was let off without punishment. St Kilda came second to last, so they did not make the playoffs.9798
Notes

References



Category:Keith Miller




Perry, p. 11.↩
↩
Perry, p. 10.↩





Perry, p. 12.↩


Perry, p. 13.↩
Perry, p. 14.↩

↩



Perry, p. 16.↩

Perry, p. 17.↩


↩
Perry, p. 18.↩

Perry, p. 19.↩
Perry, p. 20.↩

Perry, p. 21.↩
Perry, p. 22.↩

Coleman (1993), pp 522–529.↩




Perry, p. 23.↩


Perry, p. 24.↩
7/29 means that the bowler took seven wickets but conceded 29 runs in doing so.↩
Perry, p. 25.↩

Perry, p. 26.↩
Perry, p. 27.↩


↩

Perry, p. 28.↩
Perry, p. 29.↩


Perry, p. 30.↩


Perry, p. 32.↩
Perry, p. 31.↩
↩


↩


↩


Perry, p. 33.↩
Perry, p. 35.↩

↩
Perry, p. 36.↩

Perry, p. 37.↩


↩
Perry, p. 38.↩
Perry, p. 39.↩
↩
Perry, p. 40.↩

Perry, p. 43.↩
Perry, p. 44.↩
Perry, p. 45.↩
Perry, p. 46.↩


Perry, p. 47.↩
↩
↩


Perry, p. 48.↩
Perry, p. 49.↩



