


Charles Shane Robinson (born July 2, 1964) is an American professional wrestling referee referee currently signed to World Wrestling Entertainment, officiating on the SmackDown! brand.
History
While growing up, Robinson studied National Wrestling Alliance referee Tommy Young in order to hone his mannerisms as a referee. His professional wrestling career began when he joined the Pro Wrestling Federation as a photographer in 1993, supplementing his income by working as a salesman. In 1996, Robinson became a referee.
Robinson repeatedly petitioned the World Championship Wrestling professional wrestling promotion for a job, and in 1998 he was given a tryout match, refeering a dark bout between Chris Taylor and a jobber. Following the match, Robinson was signed to a contract by WCW.
Robinson refereed the Bill Goldberg - Hollywood Hulk Hogan match for the WCW Heavyweight Championship on WCW Monday Night Nitro from the Georgia Dome on July 6, 1998, where Goldberg defeated Hogan to win the title and also remain undefeated at (then) 108-0.
In 1999, Robinson became the heel referee of the Four Horsemen, aligning himself with his childhood idol, Ric Flair. Robinson frequently favored the Horsemen in the matches he officiated, enraging Randy Savage. Savage, who had been suspended by Flair (then the WCW President), proposed a match between his girlfriend, Gorgeous George, and Robinson, with Savage to be reinstated if George defeated Robinson. The match, which marked Robinson's wrestling debut, took place at Slamboree 1999 on May 9, 1999. Robinson, dubbed &quot;Little Naitch&quot; (a reference to Flair's nickname, the &quot;Nature Boy&quot;), came to the ring in a robe similar to those worn by Flair, and mimicked Flair's mannerisms, signature strut and &quot;wooo&quot; catchphrase. Robinson emulated Flair throughout the match, using Flair's customary illegal tactics, but was defeated by George, who pinned him following a diving elbow drop. Robinson wrestled his second match one week later, teaming with Flair to face Randy Savage and Madusa on an episode of WCW Monday Nitro. In the course of the match, Savage delivered a botched diving elbow drop to Robinson, cracking several of his vertebrae and collapsing his lung. After undergoing treatment, Robinson returned to WCW television several weeks later, and was appointed Vice President of WCW by Flair. Flair and Robinson ruled WCW until they were unseated by Sting, with Robinson returning to his refereeing duties.
In 2000, Robinson appeared in the WCW-produced film &quot;Ready to Rumble&quot;.
When WCW was purchased by the World Wrestling Federation in March 2001, Robinson was hired by the WWF. He debuted in the WWF as a member of The Alliance, bickering with WWF loyalist referee Jack Doan and accompanying senior WCW official Nick Patrick to ringside for his match at WWF Invasion on July 22, 2001. He refereed his first WWF match on July 2, 2001.
In 2002, the WWF was renamed &quot;World Wrestling Entertainment&quot;, and the roster was divided between two &quot;brands&quot;, RAW and SmackDown!. Robinson was initially assigned to RAW, but was later traded to SmackDown!, where he refereed many women's matches. On the July 1, 2004 episode of SmackDown!, Robinson was forced to wrestle Luther Reigns by General Manager Kurt Angle. However, the match was quickly stopped by Charlie Haas.
At No Mercy 2006, Robinson, who had refereed a match between Mr. Kennedy and The Undertaker, was on the end of a Tombstone Piledriver from the Undertaker after he had called for him to be disqualified after hitting Mr. Kennedy with his United States title belt. Robinson also officiated the World Heavyweight Championship matches at both WrestleMania 22 and WrestleMania 23.
Personal life
Robinson is a born again Christian.
On October 11, 2000, Robinson married a woman named Amy. Amy was diagnosed with melanoma of the lung in January 2001, and died on April 7, 2002. He has a daughter from a previous relationship, Jessica who is 12 years old.1
Robinson is a close friend of wrestler Nora &quot;Molly Holly&quot; Greenwald.
References

Charles Robinson at OnlineWorldofWrestling.com

External links

WWE profile


ja:&lt;U+30C1&gt;&lt;U+30E3&gt;&lt;U+30FC&gt;&lt;U+30EB&gt;&lt;U+30BA&gt;&lt;U+30FB&gt;&lt;U+30ED&gt;&lt;U+30D3&gt;&lt;U+30F3&gt;&lt;U+30BD&gt;&lt;U+30F3&gt; (WWE)
Category:1964 births Category:American photographers Category:American professional wrestlers Category:American Christians Category:People from Charlotte, North Carolina Category:Living people Category:Professional wrestling referees Category:The Four Horsemen Category:World Championship Wrestling alumni
