
&quot;The 7th Is Made Up of Phantoms&quot; is an episode of the CBS American television anthology series The Twilight Zone, created by Rod Serling.
Plot
Three United States Army National Guard soldiers (MSgt. William Connors, Pvt. Michael McCluskey, Cpl. Richard Langsford) are an M5 Stuart tank crew participating in a war game being conducted near the Battle of Little Bighorn, the site of Lieutenant Colonel George Custer's last stand. Their orders coincide with the route of Custer and his men. As they follow the route, they hear strange things such as Indian battle cries and horses running. As nobody is there, the men examine the possibilities. Connors wonders if they've somehow gone back in time. When they return, Connors reports to his captain what occurred and is reprimanded. The following day the trio goes out and again begins to experience strange phenomena. The captain contacts them via radio and orders them to return to base when Connors tries to explain what is happening. Connors breaks contact and the captain sends MPs to bring them in. However, the three men abandon their tank and continue on foot with their side arms and rifles. They find a group of tepees and McCluskey goes to investigate; he soon returns with an arrow protruding from his back. The men climb a ridge where they see a battle taking place below. They join it and are never seen again.
Later, the captain enters the Custer Battlefield National Monument. An MP reports that all they found was the abandoned tank. The two of them notice the names of their missing soldiers on the monument with the names of Custer's men. The captain states that it was a pity the missing soldiers couldn't have taken the tank with them to the battle.
References

DeVoe, Bill. (2008). Trivia from The Twilight Zone. Albany, GA: Bear Manor Media. ISBN 978-1-59393-136-0
Grams, Martin. (2008). The Twilight Zone: Unlocking the Door to a Television Classic. Churchville, MD: OTR Publishing. ISBN 978-0-9703310-9-0
Zicree, Marc Scott: The Twilight Zone Companion. Sillman-James Press, 1982 (second edition)

External links





nl:The 7th Is Made Up of Phantoms
Category:1963 television episodes Category:The Twilight Zone episodes Category:Time travel television episodes
