
Nir Brand (born June 6, 1961) is an Israeli conductor and a musician.
Early life
Nir studied piano and double bass while growing up in Beer Sheva. His first big break came when he was 17 when Chick Corea invited him to join Chick on stage at Binyanei Ha'uma in Jerusalem at the piano. Nir wowed the audience, critics and Mr. Corea himself. During his army service, Nir performed with the famous Army Entertainment Group working with musicians such as Rita and Rami Kleinstein, Hanokh Rosen and others. After leaving the army, Nir studied conducting and composition at the Rubin Academy of Music in Tel Aviv University.
Nir's one man show
A chance meeting at a restaurant with Yuval Dor, member of the band Hakol Over Habibi and a unique solo artist himself, led to building Nir's own enormously successful one man show Life Is A Concert which he has presented to a wide range of audiences has performed more than 2,000 shows up to date. During 2001, Brand made his American debut performance of Life Is A Concert in New York and Washington, D.C..
ClassiKid
In 2001, Brand faced a great amount of people, suggesting that he creates a similar programme for children, which gave birth to ClassiKid. Today, ClassiKid is a musical experience that is simultaneously entertaining and educational. Its main purpose is to help develop a child's own sense of self and then build on that individuality to encourage mutual respect and understanding of others and encourage teamwork. Throughohut the programme children are given a guided tour of the history of music with a variety of different classical musical styles and pieces being utilised within the classes to emphasise the lessons being imparted by the musician.
Each year of the programme is based on 7 separate events, varying in size from those for each individual class to those for the whole school. Over 100,000 students have joined the programme so far, and the numbers are expected to get higher in the next few years.
External links

Official website


Category:Israeli conductors Category:1961 births Category:Living people
