
Gerald &quot;Gerry&quot; Weiner, PC (born June 26, 1933) is a Canadian politician.
A pharmacist educated at McGill University and the Universit&lt;U+00E9&gt; de Montr&lt;U+00E9&gt;al, Weiner entered local politics and eventually became mayor of Dollard-des-Ormeaux, Quebec in 1982. He was a Progressive Conservative candidate in the 1984 election, winning a seat in the Canadian House of Commons as Member of Parliament for Pierrefonds&lt;U+2014&gt;Dollard, Quebec in the Tory landslide that brought Brian Mulroney to power.
After serving for two years as a parliamentary secretary, Weiner was promoted to Prime Minister Mulroney's Cabinet as Minister of State for immigration. In 1988, he became Minister of State for Multiculturalism, and served in that position until 1991.
He was re-elected as MP for the new riding of Pierrefonds&lt;U+2014&gt;Dollard in the 1988 election. In 1989, he became Secretary of State for Canada. From 1991 to 1993, he was Minister of Multiculturalism and Citizenship in the cabinets of Mulroney and his successor Kim Campbell. He lost his seat in the 1993 election that also defeated the Campbell government and reduced the Tories to two seats.
Weiner entered provincial politics, serving as president of the Equality Party, which is a party advocating the rights of anglophones in Quebec. In 1998, he was elected to the city council in Montreal as a member of the Vision Montreal party and a supporter of Mayor Pierre Bourque. Weiner served on the city's executive committee.
More recently, Weiner has returned to the private sector as a director of Investor Relations for Pace Global Advantage and a Senior Advisor to the Pace Law Firm in their Immigration department. Mr. Weiner continues to practice his profession Pharmacy in Montreal. He is currently the president of the Board of Directors for The Centre For Literacy of Quebec; the Nationsl Vice-President of the Canadian Friends of Haifa University; Chair Board of Directors Old Port of Montreal Corporation; member Board of Directors Mount Sinai Hospital and member of the Board of Directors Canada-India Business Council.
Electoral record (incomplete)

References



External links












fr:Gerry Weiner
Category:1933 births Category:Anglophone Quebec people Category:Canadian pharmacists Category:Jewish Canadian politicians Category:Living people Category:Mayors of Dollard-des-Ormeaux Category:McGill University alumni Category:Members of the House of Commons of Canada from Quebec Category:Members of the Queen's Privy Council for Canada Category:People from Montreal Category:Progressive Conservative Party of Canada MPs Category:Universit&lt;U+00E9&gt; de Montr&lt;U+00E9&gt;al alumni
