
Jomsvikings fight under a rain of hail stones in the Battle of Hj&lt;U+00F6&gt;rungav&lt;U+00E1&gt;gr

Thorkell the Tall, also known as Thorkell the High in the Anglo-Saxon chronicles (Old Norse: &lt;U+00DE&gt;orkell inn h&lt;U+00E1&gt;vi; Norwegian: Torkjell H&lt;U+00F8&gt;ge; Swedish; Torkel den H&lt;U+00F6&gt;ge: Danish: Torkild den H&lt;U+00F8&gt;je) was a Jomsviking, a son of the Scanian chieftain Strut-Harald, a brother of Jarl Sigvaldi, commander of the Jomvikings and the legendary stronghold, mythical Jomsborg, on the Island of Wollin, while himself a notable lord.
He took part in the Battle of Hj&lt;U+00F6&gt;rungav&lt;U+00E1&gt;gr in 986 and in the Battle of Swold in 1000. In 1009, he attacked England with a large army, eventually payed an unusually large Danegeld, in 1011.
In 1012, he and his men entered into the service of king Ethelred the Unready, whom they fought under in 1013 against the invasion of king Sweyn Forkbeard and his son Cnut. After the death of Swegen, and the English attacks on the Danish invaders which drove his son to abandon the conquest, Ethelred's forces were turned against the Jomsvikings in his service. Thorkells brother Henning was killed1, and he went back to Denmark, with a score to settle in England. He was to return with the to be king, in 1015, and the invasion's success meant he was proclaimed to be the Jarl of East Anglia, in 1017, after the coronation of the Viking king of England. An explanation for Cnut the Great's acceptance of Thorkell's allegiance, not to mention his military prowess, may be that he was in fact his childhood mentor2, and the Jomsvikings also of special worth to Cnut. He himself held a score against the men responsible for the betrayal of oaths of allegiance given by the English nobles after his father Forkbeard's conquest. If it was Thurkil's men who taught Cnut to fight his battles, such bonds as these were surely hard broken, even with opposition in war.
In 1021, though, Jarl Thurkil fell out with king Canute 3, and had to make himself scarce and went to Denmark. He was soon reconciled with Canute again, who proclaimed him Jarl once more, of Denmark, although he seems to disappear, in 1023, as there is no mention of him after this point4. It may be he was simply too old for anymore conflict, and the final years of his life spent at court, yet with no military commands. It may also be that he was cast out of the kingdom, to return to Jomsborg, or Scane, and lived the rest of his days as a wayward old soldier. Equally, he might have been dead soon after he was made Jarl of Denmark, and the causes entirely natural, or malevolent. We will never know, unless his final fate is written in some hidden manuscript, which now gathers dust in a cellar along with a wealth of lost medieval texts on the extremely difficult and dark Viking age.
While we are sure Thorkell is undoubtedly a real historical figure his career, especially its early part, is steeped in legendary associations with the mysterious Jomsvikings, which too often distract and distort from the facts of his life.
References

See also

Wikietables





no:Torkjell H&lt;U+00F8&gt;ge sv:Torkel den h&lt;U+00F6&gt;ge
Category:Anglo-Norse people Category:Jomsvikings



Trow, M.J., Cnut: Emperor of the North, first. edn., Sutton (2005), pg. 57↩
Trow, M.J., Cnut: Emperor of the North, first edn., Sutton (2005), pg. 44↩
Lawson, M.K., Cnut: England's Viking King, rev. edn., Tempus (2005), pg. 90↩
Lawson, M.K., Cnut: England's Viking King, rev. edn., Tempus (2005), pg. 92↩


