

Symphony Hour is a 1942 American animated short film produced by Walt Disney Productions and released by RKO Radio Pictures. The cartoon depicts Mickey Mouse conducting a symphony orchestra sponsored by Pete. The film was directed by Riley Thomson and features music adapted from the &quot;Light Cavalry Overture&quot; by Franz von Supp&lt;U+00E9&gt;. The voice cast includes Walt Disney as Mickey, Billy Bletcher as Pete, and John McLeish as a radio announcer.
The film marked the last theatrical appearance of Horace Horsecollar, Clarabelle Cow, and Clara Cluck for over 40 years, finally reappearing in Mickey's Christmas Carol (1983). Symphony Hour is also the last time that Mickey appeared with either Donald Duck or Goofy in a theatrical film for the same length of time.123
Symphony Hour bears similarities with the 1935 film The Band Concert. Leonard Maltin called this short a &quot;Spike Jones version of The Band Concert&quot;.4
Plot
Mickey leads a radio orchestra who performs the Light Cavalry Overture (by Franz von Supp&lt;U+00E9&gt;). The sponsor (Pegleg Pete as Mr. Sylvester Macaroni) loves the rehearsal, but come the actual performance, Goofy drops all the instruments under an elevator, destroying the instruments' sounds. Sylvester Macaroni hates it, but suddenly lightens up when he realises the audience loves it anyway. Clara Cluck is in the orchestra in the beginning &quot;rehearsal&quot; sequences but not in the actual performance at the end. Other characters appearing in this short are Donald Duck, Clarabelle Cow and Horace Horsecollar.
At one stage, Donald is so fed up with the chaos caused by the wrecked instruments that he packs his things and leaves. Mickey, determined to carry on come what may, points a gun at Donald's head to get him back into playing. This scene is missing in some versions of the short.
Cast

Walt Disney – Mickey Mouse
Billy Bletcher – Sylvester Macaroni (Pete)
John McLeish – Radio announcer
Pinto Colvig – Goofy

Production team

Principal animation



Jack Campbell
Les Clark
George De Beeson
John Elliotte
Ed Love
Jim Moore
Kenneth Muse
Riley Thomson
Bernard Wolf


Effects animation



Joseph Gayek
Jack Manning
Ed Parks

Notes

External links




it:L'ora della sinfonia
Category:Disney animated short films, 1940s Category:Mickey Mouse short films



↩
Symphony Hour at the Big Cartoon DataBase↩
[http://www.disneyshorts.org/shorts.aspx?shortID=342Symphony Hour] on The Encyclopedia of Animated Disney Shorts↩
&quot;Mickey Mouse in Living Color, Volume Two&quot;↩


