
George Pierce Doles (May 14, 1830 – June 2, 1864) was a Georgia businessman and Confederate general during the American Civil War. His men played a key role on the first day of the Battle of Gettysburg in driving back the Union XI Corps.
George Doles was born in Milledgeville, Georgia, the son of Josiah and Martha (Pierce) Doles. His father was a tailor by occupation. Doles was educated in the town's common schools. He became a successful businessman in Milledgeville and was elected captain of the &quot;Baldwin Blues,&quot; a local militia company.
With the secession of Georgia and the start of the Civil War in 1861, Doles enlisted in the Confederate army along with most of his militia unit. He was commissioned a captain in the 4th Georgia Infantry and stationed at Norfolk, Virginia. In May 1862, he was appointed colonel of the regiment and led it during the Peninsula Campaign as a part of the Army of Northern Virginia. He was wounded at the Battle of Malvern Hill.
During the 1862 Maryland Campaign, his regiment was a part of Ripley's Brigade in D. H. Hill's Division. It helped in the defense of South Mountain before withdrawing towards Sharpsburg, Maryland. When General Roswell Ripley fell with a wound at the Battle of Sharpsburg defending the &quot;Bloody Lane,&quot; Doles assumed temporary command of the brigade. This was made official in November 1862 with his promotion to brigadier general. He led the brigade with efficiency during the battles of Fredericksburg and Chancellorsville.
During the 1863 Gettysburg Campaign, Doles' Brigade formed part of Robert E. Rodes's Division. On July 1, 1863, Doles attacked the line of the Union XI Corps in fields near Rock Creek north of Gettysburg, driving their adversaries back over a mile. Pressure from Doles, as well as from fellow Georgia John B. Gordon and other brigades, eventually forced much of the XI Corps to collapse and retire to Cemetery Hill. Doles' men did not see any significant action the rest of the battle, nor in the subsequent Bristoe or Mine Run Campaigns.
In 1864, Doles led his brigade during the Overland Campaign, fighting in the Wilderness and at Spotsylvania, where his brigade played a role in recapturing the &quot;Mule Shoe&quot; salient. During the Battle of Cold Harbor in June, a Union sharpshooter instantly killed Doles as he was inspecting the Confederate entrenchments near Bethesda Church, Virginia.
He was buried in Memory Hill Cemetery in Milledgeville, Georgia.
References

Eicher, John H., &amp; Eicher, David J.: Civil War High Commands, Stanford University Press, 2001, ISBN 0-8047-3641-3
Evans, Clement A., Confederate Military History, Vols. VI and VII, 1899.
Warner, Ezra J., Generals in Gray: Lives of the Confederate Commanders, Louisiana State University Press, 1959, ISBN 0-8071-0823-5.

Doles, George P. Doles, George P. Doles, George P. Doles, George P. Doles, George P. Doles, George P.
