









Michael (&quot;Mike&quot;) Francis Troy (born October 3, 1940) is a retired butterfly swimmer from the United States, who broke the  world record in the 200m butterfly for five consecutive times before it was taken over by fellow American swimmer Carl Robie in 1961.
Troy is a double Olympic gold medalist, and an NCAA and an AAU Champion. He has been inducted into the International Swimming Hall of Fame, as well as the Indiana University Hall of Fame, and the Helms Arco Hall of Fame.
Troy began swimming competitively at the age of twelve. He won two gold medals at the 1960 Summer Olympics in Rome for Team USA, in the 200m butterfly and the 4x200m freestyle relay. With a college degree in hand, he became a naval officer and attended BUD/S, or Navy Underwater Demolition/SEALs. He was awarded for distinguished and heroic service in Vietnam. As a swim coach, Troy has developed many age group, junior, and senior champions. Over fifty of kids swimmers have been on national and international teams, including four swimmers that he coached to the Summer Olympics.
He has served as Chairman of the International Section of the U.S. Olympic Committee, and as vice-president of the American Swimming Coaches Association. As the National Director of the USA Paralympic Swimming Team he accompanied the team to Athens, Greece in September 2004, where the team won numerous medals. He was recently named the 2004 National Teacher of the Year from the USSSA (United States Swim School Association).
He now owns http://www.goldmedalswimschool.com and Smokey Row Swim Club in Carmel, IN.
References

Gold Medal Swim School






  

de:Michael Troy it:Michael Troy pl:Michael Troy fi:Michael Troy
Category:1940 births Category:Living people Category:Swimming coaches Category:American swimmers Category:Olympic swimmers of the United States Category:Swimmers at the 1960 Summer Olympics Category:Olympic gold medalists for the United States Category:Former world record holders in swimming Category:gold medal swim school
