
Logo of the White Stag Leadership Development program, derived from the badge of the  1933 World Scout Jamboree and the white stag of Hungarian mythology.

White Stag Leadership Development is a non-profit organization founded on the Monterey Peninsula, California, in 1958 by Dr. B&lt;U+00E9&gt;la H. B&lt;U+00E1&gt;n&lt;U+00E1&gt;thy. The youth-run program prepares and produces two week-long summer camps for other youth age 11-17 each summer using hands-on learning methods to teach eleven specific leadership competencies. Since its inception, it has operated continuously for more than 50 years entirely on a voluntary basis, with an estimated 20,000 youth having attended its camps.1
Rationale for developing leadership in youth
The White Stag program's origins are in Boy Scouting. Lord Baden-Powell established the principles of training junior leaders in the book Scouting for Boys. He said that the Scoutmaster should select &quot;a party of six to eight youth or bright boys, and carefully instruct them in the details of peace-Scouting.&quot;2
Since the late 1950s, the Boy Scouts of America has repeatedly stated that the primary job of the Scoutmaster is to &quot;train and guide boy leaders to run their troop.&quot;3 In his master's thesis, Banathy wrote:

B&lt;U+00E1&gt;n&lt;U+00E1&gt;thy formulated the White Stag program to address the needs of youth from 11 to 17 years of age. He did this when defining leadership was still in its infancy and before researchers had clearly identified the specific needs of youth for leadership education.
Needs of youth for leadership education
A number of researchers have identified needs of youth for specific kinds of formative experiences. In a well-regarded study, Ferber, Pittman, and Marshall described five developmental priorities for youth:4

Learning (developing positive basic and applied academic attitudes, skills, and behaviors)
Thriving (developing physically healthy attitudes, skills, and behaviors)
Connecting (developing positive social attitudes, skills, and behaviors)
Working (developing positive vocational attitudes, skills, and behaviors)
Leading (developing positive civic attitudes, skills, and behaviors)

Other studies have identified areas that help youth acquire the attitudes, skills, and knowledge required to be effective in society. These include:5

Strong relationships with adults
Training in mediation, conflict resolution, team dynamics, and project management
New roles and responsibilities based on experiences and resources that provide opportunity for growth
Teamwork and peer networking
Opportunities to practice communication, negotiation, and refusal skills

The White Stag Leadership Development Program's methods address all of these areas.
Other youth leadership organizations
There are a number of youth organizations in the United States that provide programs to develop leadership in youth. However, they define leadership in widely varying ways and offer leadership programs with a variety of aims. These include:
Boys &amp; Girls Clubs of America The Boys and Girls Club offers two small group leadership development clubs, the Torch Club and the Keystone Club, targeting youth 11-13 and 14-18 respectively. &quot;Club programs and services promote and enhance the development of boys and girls by instilling a sense of competence, usefulness, belonging and influence.&quot;6
Hugh O'Brian Youth Leadership Foundation &quot;HOBY&lt;U+2019&gt;s flagship program, the Leadership Seminar, is designed for high school sophomores to recognize their leadership talents and apply them in becoming effective, ethical leaders in their home, schools, workplace and community.&quot;7
National Youth Leadership Council NYLC provides academic-based programs and camps in the Wichita and Manhattan Kansas area to &quot;help children develop a strong sense of character and achieve their unique potential, thereby infusing our communities with a more confident and capable group of future leaders.&quot;8
Youth Leadership Foundation 9 Located in Washington, D.C., YLF's purpose is to &quot;hone basic reading, writing, and comprehension skills to enable students to perform at grade-level or better.&quot;10
National Youth Leadership Forum NYLF provides career-related programs in eight cities across the United States focused on law, medicine, and national security. Their programs typically cost $2000, excluding travel, and target &quot;the nation&lt;U+2019&gt;s highest-achieving high school and university students.&quot;11
Youth Leadership Foundation Inc.12 YLF Inc., located in Florida, puts on two three-day conferences to teach students &quot;basic elements of leadership needed in the maintenance of a free society...basic concepts of the free enterprise systems...develop an awareness of those special aspects of leadership applicable to our national institutions...and develop leadership skill to enable students attending conferences to become citizens and the future leaders of their community.&quot;13
None of these programs appear to have either defined or teach a specific set of leadership competencies. White Stag Leadership Development is distinctive because the youth plan and implement a leadership program for other youth, the multi-phase, multi-year organizational structure, of how it defines leadership, and the specific nature of its leadership competencies.
Organization and administration
The White Stag program is currently presented by two related non-profit groups in two different summer camps each year.
In Northern California, the non-profit White Stag Association14 sponsors three Venturing Crews, a Learning for Life group, and a Boy Scout Troop that plan and produce the summer camp program in Northern California, usually at Camp John Mensinger or Camp Hi-Sierra in the Sierra Nevada Mountains. The youth and adult members of the Camp Mensinger program are registered in Venturing Crews in the San Francisco Bay Area,  Mount Diablo Silverado, and the  Greater Yosemite Councils. All youth staff are active members of Scout Troops or  Venturing Crews.
In Central California, the non-profit White Stag Leadership Development Academy15 sponsors a Learning for Life group, a Venturing Crew, and a Boy Scout Troop in the Monterey Bay Area Council. These youth plan and put on a program each summer in Central California, typically at Camp Cutter in the Santa Cruz Mountains. Most youth staff participants are currently members of Boy Scout or Girl Scout Troops. If a youth is not active in another Scouting unit, they are registered, depending on their age, in one of the units.
Both programs adhere to the Youth Protection Standards of the Boy Scouts of America, including background checks of all adult leaders. Both have drawn participants from other states, including Washington, Oregon, and Arizona.
Program phases and levels
Based on Bela Banathy's original work, the program is still organized into six development levels16. These are tailored to the needs of youth at specific ages and maturity levels. These levels are:17


Program Phase Structure



Phase


Phase 1 — Patrol Member Development


Phase 2 — Patrol Leader Development


Phase 3 — Troop Leader Development




Level


Level 1


Level 2


Level 3




Purpose: Teaches skills required for—


participating effectively in small groups.


leading small groups.


leader of a leadership team.




Candidate Participants



For youth ages 11-12 (or have completed 5th grade)&lt;U+2020&gt;
Participants learn basic camping and patrol member skills
Experience how to be a member of a small group
Includes a one-night backpacking trip




For youth ages 12-14&lt;U+2020&gt;
Participants learn the skills of a leader of a small group
Participants take turns acting as small group (patrol) leaders
Includes a two-night backpacking trip




For youth ages 14-17&lt;U+2020&gt;
Participants learn leadership of two or more small groups
Participants take turns acting as small group (patrol) leaders
One participant is chosen by youth staff each day to lead the entire troop
Includes a three-night backpacking trip





Level


Level 4


Level 5


Level 6




Youth Staff Qualifications



For youth age 14-15&lt;U+2020&gt;

Senior Patrol Leaders

Assistant Senior Patrol Leaders

Patrol Leaders

Quartermaster, Evaluation




For youth age 15-16&lt;U+2020&gt;

Senior Patrol Leaders

Assistant Senior Patrol Leaders

Patrol Counselors

Quartermaster, Evaluation




For youth age 16-20&lt;U+2020&gt;

Senior Patrol Counselor

Assistant Senior Patrol Counselors

Patrol Counselors

Quartermaster, Evaluation





Adult Staff


Level 7
Phase Advisers (age 21+)
Assistant Phase Advisers (age 18+)


Level 8
Phase Advisers (age 21+)
Assistant Phase Advisers (age 18+)


Level 9
Phase Advisers (age 21+)
Assistant Phase Advisers (age 18+)






Post Advisers | Program Directors | Administrative | Operational Committees




Program &amp; Support Staff


The Post Adviser must meet BSA Scout and Venturing Program requirements. Committees are composed of interested parents and alumni of all ages who fulfill critical support roles including registration, treasury, commissary, quartermaster, evaluation, medical and so forth, during the year and at summer camp.



&lt;U+2020&gt; The age levels are not absolute, but for guidance in placing participants in the phase most suitable to their needs.
The youth staff develop each summer camp's program during the preceding nine months in a series of leadership development training and planning events. They are ultimately responsible for the entire leadership program's content.
Program Aims
The aims are the personal attributes that the program strives to help participants improve as they participate in the program. The White Stag program has four specific aims18 that are closely aligned with the aims of the Boy Scouts of America.19 with the addition of leadership development.
Leadership Development
We inspire individuals to engage life as an ongoing adventure, to challenge themselves, and to lead others to pursue excellence.
Character Development
We encourage people to do what is right, no matter what, and to serve themselves and others.
Personal Fitness
We encourage individuals to accept physical and mental challenges, to surpass their own expectations, expand their knowledge, skills and abilities, and strive for continuous personal improvement.
Citizenship Training
We help individuals to develop a positive attitude, influence those around them, join in and shape their community.
Program Values
The program has defined a set of values that govern how the program is implemented. They include:20
Leadership competencies
In his research for his master's thesis, Bela identified 80 characteristics of leadership21. He condensed these into eleven leadership competencies which he then proposed be taught in a systematic process using six developmental levels tailored to the various needs of youth as they mature. These competencies are:22
Getting and Giving Information
This competency enables a learner to:

Develop an understanding of the types of communication—verbal, written and non-verbal.


Identify Getting and Giving Information as one of the major techniques of establishing a group.


Acquire knowledge of receiving, retrieving, and giving information and the problems of interpreting.


Gain experience at communicating within the group to accomplish a task.


Develop an attitude of evaluating the ability of the group in terms of getting and giving information to both accomplish a task and maintain the group.

Understanding Group Needs and Characteristics
This competency enables a learner to:

Recognize understanding the needs and characteristics of group members as a major technique for building group unity and identity.


Recognize and differentiate between values, norms, needs, and characteristics.


Gain knowledge of the relationship between planning activities, group performance, and individual needs and characteristics.

Knowing and Understanding Group Resources
This competency enables a learner to:

Recognize knowledge and use of group resources as a major technique in bringing a group together and creating commitment to common goals.


Recognize that resources are theoretically limitless, and that the leader's (and group's) ability to recognize and utilized diverse resources tremendously affects what the group can accomplish.


Involve more people in active leadership by giving each a part according to his or her resources.


Evaluate the impact the availability of resources has on doing a job and maintaining the group.

Controlling the Group
This competency enables a learner to:

Recognize how his own behavior influences and controls others.


Distinguish between controlling group performance and setting the example.


Identify control as a function of the group, or of a facilitator, and the advantages and disadvantages of each having that responsibility.


Identify different techniques for controlling group performance and their suitability in different situations.


Deploy group resources to the best interests of the group while encouraging personal growth.


Evaluate leadership performance in terms of group performance.

Counseling
This competency enables the learner to:

Gain knowledge of the principles of counseling.


Practice some simple techniques to be used in ordinary situations.


Develop an awareness of counseling as a function of leaders.


Grow personally in areas of problem solving and decision making.


Help others to increased ability to solve problems and make decisions.

Setting the Example
This competency enables the learner to:

List three positive results a leader who sets a good example can obtain.


See that Setting an Example is an important part of Controlling Group Performance.


Recognize the leader's responsibility for setting the example.


List seven ways a leader can set a good example.

Planning
This competency enables the learner to:

Identify problem-solving as one of they key techniques in developing the group's capability.


Gain knowledge of a definite technique for problem-solving and planning.


Understand the value of problem-solving in group commitment to the task and to group unity.

Evaluation
This competency enables the learner to:

Use evaluation as a technique to maintain group integrity while improving job performance.


Describe what is meant by &quot;getting the job done&quot; and &quot;maintaining the group.&quot;


Analyze a situation for improvement.


Avoid conflicts between getting the job done and maintaining the group.


Develop an attitude of constant (informal and formal) evaluation.


Use a variety of strategies for evaluation purposes.

Sharing Leadership
This competency enables the learner to:

Develop a concept of leadership for a group which permits different functions of leadership being shared or distributed among group members according to the situation and member's strengths.


Gain knowledge of the forces acting on the leader and the group, and inherent in the situation which makes for appropriateness of leadership styles.


Distinguish between situations in which certain styles of leadership are appropriate.


Relate styles of leadership to the twin factors of getting the job done and maintaining group integrity and morale.


Develop attitudes of using appropriate styles of leadership to fit needs of the group to meet situations and accomplish short-and long-range goals.

Representing the Group
This competency enables the learner to:

Understand Representing the Group as the process by which other groups identify his group.


Identify some of the questions a representative must ask of himself before proceeding without prior group consensus or input.


Develop an attitude of faithful representation of the entire group.


Assess whether or not a decision can be agreed to without further group decision-making.

Manager of Learning
This competency enables the learner to:

Identify Manager of Learning as a principle technique of instruction.


List key instructional strategies for effectively communicating information.


Emphasize the learner in the learning process.

Outdoor learning
The outdoors environment provides a context for learning that is physically demanding and entirely different from that experienced everyday at home and in school. The outdoors stimulates new ways of thinking and approaching both task- and group-related problems. As participants learn they can exceed what they perceive to be their physical limits, they find their mental capacity also grows. We use the physical environment to tire the individual and open their minds to new ways of thinking. We do nothing indoors that can be done outdoors and encourage physical fitness through outdoor activities. Using the outdoors avoids the negative association of a standard classroom environment.
In addition, the program utilizes Scoutcraft skills to provide opportunities to practice leadership skills. Banathy commented:

Evaluation attitude
In his master's thesis, Banathy wrote:

Spirit and traditions
One of the distinctive characteristics of the program is a body of ceremonies, traditions, songs, code, and spirit-related activities. These include a re-telling of the White Stag Legend23 based on the white stag of Hungarian mythology.
Bela wrote,

The White Stag Legend is used to inspire in the participants a desire for reflection, continuous self-improvement, and pursuit of higher aims and goals. The spirit and tradition activities are used to communicate specific vision and values that include characteristics of servant leadership, compassion, enthusiasm, kindness, and selflessness.
Since its inception, the White Stag program has evolved several ceremonies that use the symbolism of the White Stag to recognize individuals' progress and levels of achievement. They include Baden-Powell's farewell speech from the Fourth World Jamboree, and a recitation of the White Stag legend. These ceremonies are used to communicate the program's vision, values, and ethics. The program has also developed a number of traditions, for example, woggles, waist ropes, staves, berets, and patrol names.
The participant ceremonies typically include a initiatory neckerchief ceremony, a legend ceremony, a graduation neckerchief ceremony, and a final tri-phase graduation ceremony at the end of summer camp. The youth and adult staff may also participate in additional ceremonies at various times during the year. All of these borrow themes from the white stag of Hungarian mythology.
Patrol method
Baden-Powell wrote:

Hands-on learning
The White Stag program emphasizes use of experiential learning activities in the context of outdoor education. These help participants retain what they learn about leadership generally and the eleven leadership competencies specifically. For example, participant teams can be challenged to build foot bridges, complete a hike, build a Tyrolean Traverse, cook a meal, or other practical challenges.24
Hurdle method
Banathy defined the Hurdle Method as:

The hurdle method is closely linked to hands-on learning.
Direct approach
Banathy asserted that:

Banathy went on to define specific leadership behaviors and learnings, including the leadership competencies.
Manager of Learning
Banathy initially defined Manager of Learning in part as the Project Approach:

Infinity principal
According to Banathy, leadership development must be ongoing:




Uniforming
A uniform displaying the White Stag logo is a visible reminder of the program's founding vision articulated by Baden-Powell at the conclusion of the 1933 World Jamboree. The uniform reminds the individual wearing it of their commitment to the program's values. It instills self-esteem in the person and pride in the program. It eliminates class and socio-economic distinctions. Wearing a uniform improves member's behavior and lessens the impact on a person's personal wardrobe.
Financial support
White Stag is a 501(c)3 non-profit and financially self-supporting. All participants, including youth and adult staff, pay fees to participate. Fees for participants attending the week-long summer camp at Rancho Alegre are $265 in 2008-09.
History
White Stag traces its direct roots to 1933 and G&lt;U+00F6&gt;d&lt;U+00F6&gt;ll&lt;U+00F6&gt;, Hungary, and the Fourth World Scout Jamboree which three of its founders attended.
Origins in Hungary


Participant badge of the 1933 World Scout Jamboree

At the  1933 World Scout Jamboree, a 14 year old Scout was kneeling by his campfire when three uniformed men rode up on horseback: Count Paul Teleki, the Chief Scout of Hungary and the Chief of Staff for the jamboree; General Kisbarnaki Ferenc Farkas, a general staff officer of the Royal Hungarian Army; and Baden-Powell, the British hero of the Boer War and Chief Scout of the World. The men introduced themselves to the Scout and inspected his camp. They complimented him on a job well done and rode on.2526
B&lt;U+00E1&gt;n&lt;U+00E1&gt;thy also briefly met Joseph Szentkiralyi, another Hungarian Scout. Elsewhere during the Jamboree, Hungarian Sea Scouter Paul Ferenc Sujan's camp was visited by Baden-Powell, who asked to taste some of his soup. American Maury Tripp attended the Jamboree from Saratoga, California. These three Scouts would later play an instrumental role in B&lt;U+00E1&gt;n&lt;U+00E1&gt;thy's life. At the conclusion of the Jamboree, these four young men were moved by the farewell speech of Baden-Powell, in which he challenged them:

This challenge and the myth of the White Stag it cites grew to become a source of inspiration to B&lt;U+00E1&gt;n&lt;U+00E1&gt;thy. He wrote,

In 1933, B&lt;U+00E1&gt;n&lt;U+00E1&gt;thy attended the regional patrol leader training week and in 1934 and 1935, the national spring leadership camp at Harshegy, Budapest. In 1934, he was awarded the best notebook prize of the national training camp and in 1935, he was invited to serve on the junior staff of the camp.27 The legend of the White Stag becomes an enduring symbol of challenge and opportunity for many others over the ensuing decades.
During World War II, B&lt;U+00E1&gt;n&lt;U+00E1&gt;thy was a junior officer of the Royal Hungarian Army. He became a faculty member of the Hungarian Royal Academy, served on the National Council of the Hungarian Scout Association, and became the voluntary national director for youth leadership development. Barely escaping Hungary at the end of World War II, B&lt;U+00E1&gt;n&lt;U+00E1&gt;thy arrived after considerably personal trials in June 1951 at Monterey, California to teach at at the Army Language School.
Joseph Szentkiralyi also barely survived World War II. He and his family had previously arrived in the United States during 1939. At the start of World War II, they were deported back to Hungary. Because he spoke English, Joe was assigned to watch over the crew members of the first American B-17 bomber to crash land in Hungary. When the crew told him sensitive information, he was ordered to reveal the information to his superiors. Citing the Geneva Convention, he refused. The authorities prepared to Court Martial him, and Joe fled. During a time of frequent Allied aerial bombing raids, he hid where he figured no one would look for him: in the upper floors of apartment buildings. During one bombing raid a  bomb crashed through and landed on the floor above him. Fortunately it did not explode.28
Unlike B&lt;U+00E1&gt;n&lt;U+00E1&gt;thy, Szentkiralyi's family did not escape the Siege of Budapest that began on 26 December 1944. For the next 45 days, they endured constant artillery bombardment and street-by-street tank and infantry battles between the Germans, the remnants of the Royal Hungarian Army, and the attacking Ukranian and Russian forces. Joe, along with others, risked their lives by leaving the bomb shelters to butcher frozen horse carcasses in the streets in order to prevent starvation—one of many challenges they faced in order to help keep their families alive. At the end, daily rations were comprised of melted snow, horsemeat, and 150 grams of bread. Eighty percent of Budapest's buildings were destroyed or damaged during the siege. About 40,000 civilians died during the battle. When the Russians finally claimed victory, they initiated an orgy of violence, including mass rape, wholesale theft of anything they could lay their hands on, and random executions.29
Having survived the war, Joe was able to use his English language skills and found work for the American Embassy in Budapest as a translator. However, this put him in a vulnerable position as the Communists hardened their grip on power. He read the news bulletins sent via diplomatic channels to the American press attach&lt;U+00E9&gt; and knew that the western nations were unable to prevent Russian's domination of Central Europe. Because he had lived in the United States and spoke English, he knew he would fall under suspicion. People he knew began to disappear, including a friend who worked at the U.S. Embassy. Within a few days he found a not on his desk that read, &quot;You are next.&quot; With American assistance, he fled Hungary for Switzerland immediately. His family followed him a short while later, and in 1948 they arrived on the Monterey Peninsula, where Joe founded the Hungarian Department at the Army Language School .30
Starting in 1951, almost 25 years afterwards, four Scouts who had attended the 1933 Fourth World Jamboree were brought back together. Joseph Szentkiralyi (which he had Anglicized as St. Clair) met B&lt;U+00E1&gt;n&lt;U+00E1&gt;thy again. In 1956, they were joined by Hungarian Paul Ferenc Sujan. In Monterey, through their Scouting contacts, they met F. Maurice Tripp.
Growth in the United States
B&lt;U+00E1&gt;n&lt;U+00E1&gt;thy had developed a passion for the idea of leadership development in boys. In Monterey, he became Chairman of the Leadership Training Committee of the Monterey Bay Area Council and founded a junior leader training program he christened the &quot;White Stag Leadership Development Program.&quot; Borrowing on his experience at the 1933 World Jamboree, B&lt;U+00E1&gt;n&lt;U+00E1&gt;thy based much of the program's spirit and traditions on the white stag of Hungarian mythology. &quot;Lord Baden-Powell was my personal idol and I long felt a commitment to give back to Scouting what I had received,&quot; Bela said.31
B&lt;U+00E1&gt;n&lt;U+00E1&gt;thy informally recruited one patrol of boys, including his own sons, and took them to summer camp in 1957 to test his idea. John Chiorini, a 17-year-old Eagle Scout, was working on the waterfront. &quot;B&lt;U+00E9&gt;la came through camp with a patrol of six or seven boys and commandeered me to teach a class on camp craft. He said he was trying out some new ideas with this patrol,&quot; Chiorini reported &quot;B&lt;U+00E9&gt;la listened intently as I presented and then he came up after and gave me some tips on teaching. He was a mentor to me from that point on.&quot;32
During the summer of 1958, Bela recruited two patrols of boys to take part.33 Chiorini was recruited to serve as Senior Patrol Leader. There wasn't much discussion of leadership competencies to start. B&lt;U+00E1&gt;n&lt;U+00E1&gt;thy seemed to have an internal sense of direction which not everyone understood. Chiorini said, &quot;White Stag was all about creating an environment in which youth led youth. At the time, Scouting was not necessarily a boy-led program. I remember it was very clear in B&lt;U+00E9&gt;la&lt;U+2019&gt;s mind what a boy-led Scouting program looked like. There was no question about who was in charge in White Stag. The boys were.&quot;34 Fran Peterson, a local Scouter who served on the National Engineering Service for the Boy Scouts of America, along with St. Clair, Sujan, and Tripp, helped B&lt;U+00E1&gt;n&lt;U+00E1&gt;thy develop the White Stag program. Some of them remained active with it into the 1970s.
During the summer of 1959, the first full-scale program was put on. B&lt;U+00E1&gt;n&lt;U+00E1&gt;thy served as Scoutmaster, Fran Petersen was Assistant Scoutmaster, along with eight other adult staff and 13 youth staff. The training troop consisted of 39 trainees from 24 troops. In the first two years of the program, emphasis was placed on training Patrol Leaders.35 Bela said, &quot;I saw in these principles an opportunity to develop the White Stag program for my three Boy Scout sons as well as show my gratitude to this country and Scouting.&quot;36
During the same year, B&lt;U+00E1&gt;n&lt;U+00E1&gt;thy continued his research on leadership and learned that the U.S. Army's Human Resources Research Office (HumRRO) at the Presidio of Monterey was conducting research into the leadership characteristics of non-commissioned officers. B&lt;U+00E1&gt;n&lt;U+00E1&gt;thy contacted research psychologist Paul Hood, Task Leader of Task NCO (Non-commissioned Officer), and began a fruitful collaboration. A HumRRO publication titled, A Guide for the Infantry Squad Leader--What the Beginning Squad Leader Should Know About Human Relations articulated a core set of leadership competencies.37 B&lt;U+00E1&gt;n&lt;U+00E1&gt;thy found Hood's research enumerated characteristics of leadership that strongly validated his vision and direction. With Hood's active encouragement, he decided to incorporate these leadership skills into White Stag. During 1963, B&lt;U+00E1&gt;n&lt;U+00E1&gt;thy focused his research and formalized it as his Master's Thesis at San Jose State University. The Monterey Bay Area Council published an abbreviated version of it titled A Design for Leadership Development in Scouting.n&lt;U+00E1&gt;thy1963&quot; /&gt;38
National Council takes notice
With the interest and support of the Monterey Bay Area Council executive staff and board, the program was continually tested and improved. Fran Peterson (member of the National Council's Engineering Service) and F. Maurice Tripp (a research scientist and member of the National Boy Scout Committee) brought the White Stag program to the National Council's attention. In 1962, Tripp formed and chaired an advisory board of educators, psychologists, management specialists, and members of the Scout professional staff.
As an outgrowth of this interest, Dr. Tripp gave a talk in 1963 at the Fifty-third Annual Meeting of the National Council of the Boy Scouts of America on Development of Leadership in Boy Leaders of Boys.39 In the summer of 1963, a nation-wide program was pilot-tested by the National Council, who arranged for a patrol of Scouts from the San Mateo County Council and a few boys from the Circle Ten Council in Dallas to attend White Stag summer camp at the  Pico Blanco Boy Scout Reservation. The program was observed and evaluated by Ken Wells (national director of Research) and John Larson (staff researcher). Wells had a long history with Wood Badge, beginning as a participant in the second United States Wood Badge course in 1948. They were impressed by what they saw and experienced.40
In December, 1963, Larson observed the program's annual Indaba. In January 1964, Tripp organized a meeting to assess the success of the pilot-test at Asilomar in Pacific Grove, California. Attendees included representatives of the National and Monterey Bay Area Council:41
National Council representatives

Ellsworth Augustus (Chief Scout and National Council President)
Marshall Monroe (Assistant National Scout Executive)
Bill Lawrence (National Director of Volunteer Training)
Harold Hunt (National Council Vice President and Professor of Education at Harvard)
Ken Wells (Director of Research Service)
Jack Rhey (National Director of Professional Training)
Bob Perin (National Training Representative)
Walt Whidden (Region 12 Executive)

Monterey Bay Area Council representatives

Tom Moore (Monterey Bay Area Council Executive)
Dale Hirt (President of the Monterey Bay Area Council)
John Barr (Chairman of the Department of Education at San Jose State University)
Joe St. Clair (Chairman, Hungarian Department at the Army Language School on the Presidio and Training Committee Chairman)
Fran Peterson (member of the White Stag Advisory Board, Scoutmaster in Chular, and member of the National Council's Engineering Service)
Ralph Herring (member of the White Stag Committee)
Ferris Bagley (a retired businessman with an interest in leadership development)
Bela Banathy (Director of White Stag and Director of the East Europe and Middle East Division of the Army Language School)
Paul Hood (Research Scientist at U.S. Army's Human Resources Research Office)
Judson Stull, a local attorney with an interest in Scouting
F. Maurice Tripp (Chairman, White Stag Advisory Committee, and member of the National Boy Scout Committee)

The purpose of the meeting was to acquaint the national council leadership with the new design for junior leader training, and to plan how to effectively incorporate the teaching of leadership skills within Scouting.42
During a thorough study, they interviewed participants, parents, and leaders. They distributed questionnaires to program participants, reviewed the White Stag literature, and observed the program in action. They also conducted a statisical analysis of troops taking part in White Stag and compared them to non-participating units. In December 1965, Chief Scout Executive Joseph Brunton received the White Stag Report. It stated that offering leadership development to youth was a unique opportunity for Scouting to provide a practical benefit to youth and would add substantial support to Scouting's character development goals. It recommended that Wood Badge should be used to experiment with the leadership development principles of White Stag.
The National Council leadership approved adapting the White Stag program for nationwide use. Dr. John W. Larson, Director of Boy Scout Leader Training for the National Council, adapted the White Stag leadership development competencies and wrote the first syllabus for the adult  Wood Badge program.4344.
In 1963, the San Mateo County Council sent Scouts to attend White Stag, and a total of 80 Scouts participated.45
World Scouting publishes paper
The World Organization of the Scout Movement published the results of the Boy Scouts of America's research and testing of the White Stag approach to leadership development.  B&lt;U+00E9&gt;la B&lt;U+00E1&gt;n&lt;U+00E1&gt;thy wrote a monograph Leadership Development: World Scouting Reference Paper No. 1, which he presented in 1969 to a meeting of the World Scout Conference in Helsinki, Finland.46 He advocated leadership development by design in Scouting based on the leadership competencies of White Stag.
In 1968, Salvador Fern&lt;U+00E1&gt;ndez Beltr&lt;U+00E1&gt;n, Deputy Secretary of the World Organization of the Scout Movement, visited camp during the summer program at Pico Blanco Scout Reservation. Leaders of the Mexican Scout movement asked B&lt;U+00E1&gt;n&lt;U+00E1&gt;thy to guide them in the adaptation of the White Stag program concept. B&lt;U+00E1&gt;n&lt;U+00E1&gt;thy was appointed to the Interamerican Scout Committee and participated in three Interamerican Train the Trainer events in Mexico, Costa Rica, and Venezuela. He guided their national training teams in designing leadership development by design programs.
Funding for continuing the experiment in the junior leader training program and evaluating its results were obtained by the Boy Scouts from the Rockefeller Brothers Fund, who underwrote continued tests of the junior leader instructor training program at the Philmont Scout Ranch in New Mexico and the Schiff Scout Reservation in New Jersey.47

Adapted for use in U.S. Wood Badge

In 1967, the National Boy Scouts of America began to test a revised Wood Badge program utilizing the White Stag leadership competencies. Two of the project members, Ken Wells and Bob Perin, had participated in the second United States Wood Badge course in 1948. Despite their long experience in Wood Badge, they saw the benefit of adding leadership skills development to Wood Badge.48
&quot;The Wood Badge program first was laboratory tested at the Schiff Scout Reservation in New Jersey and at  Philmont in New Mexico in 1967. Modified versions of the White Stag leadership competencies were an essential part of Wood Badge. Following the program's revision it was field tested in five councils during 1968.&quot;49. Among these was an experimental Wood Badge course in Monterey in 1968. Joe St. Clair served as Scoutmaster, B&lt;U+00E1&gt;n&lt;U+00E1&gt;thy was course director, and Fran Petersen was Senior Patrol Leader. John Larson, National Director of Education, was also present. In a unique application not since reproduced, all attendees were asked to bring their entire troops to a single week of summer camp, allowing the Wood Badge staff to use the summer camp as an application for Wood Badge.50 The course was further pilot-tested in 1971 at Philmont.51 The leadership competencies remained an essential part of Wood Badge through the 1990s,52 when there was a shift in emphasis to unit meetings using the troop camping activity as a delivery model.
In 2003, the Wood Badge program, re-christened as Wood Badge for the 21st Century, was initially designed to incorporate a  participatory leadership model originally based on situational leadership.5354. Due to the costs of royalty fees, the program was then modified to emphasize the stages of team development based on the principles described by Bruce Tuckman in 1965 as forming-storming-norming-performing. Thus Wood Badge for the 21st Century, at one time based on the White Stag leadership competencies conceived of during the 1960s and 1970s, was 30 years later updated and based on generic group leadership concepts from the 1960s.
Modified for use in junior leader training
Pilot-testing and experimentation continued for three more years, and an experimental junior leader training program was begun in 1969. This later became Troop Leader Development, containing modified versions of the leadership competencies which were included in the final Troop Leadership Development Staff Guide, written by John W. Larson.55

In 1973, this new junior leader training program was implemented nationwide, emphasizing for the first time teaching leadership skills over scoutcraft skills, and giving credit to White Stag for its origins.56 It was later renamed Troop Leader Training Confrence and then Junor Leader training Conference.57}}
The program incorporated for the first time eleven specific competencies of leadership. Prior junior leader training programs had focused primarily on Scoutcraft skills. The primary difference between the national JLT program and the White Stag program was the removal of the spirit and traditions associated with the white stag of Hungarian mythology and changes to terminology used to refer to the leadership competencies.
In 1993, another revision was issued titled Junior Leader Training Conference. The leadership competencies introduced in the 1974 TLD program were dramatically changed, including deleting a great deal of material previously described as Manager of Learning and re-naming it Effective Teaching. This change moved the focus from the learner to the teacher, contradicting Banathy's focus on the learner that he found so essential to his concept of youth leadership development in his master's thesis.n&lt;U+00E1&gt;thy1963&quot; /&gt;
Until 2004, the Junior Leader Training Conference Staff Guide continued to present modified versions of the eleven leadership competencies conceived by Bela Banathy and still being presented by the White Stag program.58 After Wood Badge was updated in 2003, parallel changes were subsequently implemented that affected junior leader training. A junior leadership training Task Force was assembled during 2003-04 and undertook revisions to that program to bring it closer in alignment to the Wood Badge program. Their efforts resulted in the National Youth Leadership Training (NYLT) program. The new manual emphasizes that it is national program and strongly discourages any variation from the minute-by-minute agenda. NYLT uses eleven specific mnemonics to help participants remember course content, and strives to mirror the patterns of troop meetings.59 It utilizes video and Microsoft PowerPoint slides, requiring computers and video projectors to communicate much of the essential content.
Recent history
The White Stag program continued to present the Monterey Bay Area Council's official junior leader training program through the early 1970s, and again from 1994 to 2004. In 1975, Bill Roberts, the Phase III Director, invited the first Explorer girls age 14-18 to take part in the program and adult women to serve on adult staff, becoming the first coeducational leadership development program in the Boy Scouts of America.60 When Banathy learns of girls' new role in the program, he says it is long overdue. Committed to training youth of all ages in a manner reflecting the real world, where both sexes must work together, the next year White Stag invited girls age 11-13 to participate as well.61
The co-ed program did not sit well with the Monterey Bay Area Council, and they elected to replace White Stag with the nationally-mandated adaptation of White Stag, as contained in the 1974 syllabus Troop Leadership Development Staff Guide. The adult volunteer leaders of White Stag moved the program to Santa Cruz and rented Skylark Ranch Resident Camp from the Girl Scouts of Santa Clara County for two years. In subsequent years, they moved the summer program to  San Mateo County Council's Camp Cutter in the Santa Cruz Mountains, and later, at different times, to  Marin Council's Camp Marin-Sierra and  Yosemite Council's Camp Mensinger in the California Sierra Nevada Mountains. They stopped attracting youth from the Monterey Bay Area as well.
In 1993, the Monterey Bay Area Council's Council Junior Leader Training Chairman Steve Cardinalli offered to run the Council's junior leader training program using the White Stag methods. This proposal was readily accepted by the Council Executive. White Stag adult alumni of the now San Francisco Bay Area-based program who lived in the Monterey Peninsula area recruited a youth staff who planned and presented the White Stag program at  Pico Blanco Boy Scout Reservation in 1994. This Monterey-based program continued to present the council's junior leader training program until 2005, when a new Council Executive decided once again to adopt the National Youth Leadership Training program. The adult leadership of the Monterey White Stag group moved the program to Camp Cutter in the Santa Cruz Mountains. Participation each year has continued to increase, with 133 candidate participants attending in 2008, up from 70 in 2006.62
During 2004, White Stag Program Director Steve Cardinalli and former Director John Connelly founded a comparable program for the Girl Scouts of California's Central Coast Council. It had three phases and nine levels, identical to the White Stag program. It was held at Cutter Boy Scout Reservation for two years. The Girl Scouts then assumed leadership of the program and renamed it Artimus (after the Goddess of women in childbirth), and have continued to run it as a resident camp for girls 10-17 each summer.63
Both the Northern and Central California White Stag organizations continue to develop and present week-long summer camps for youth by youth, led by a corps of volunteer adults, observing their 50th anniversary in 2008.
Other White Stag programs
Two junior leader training programs in the Crossroads of America Council in Indianapolis, Indiana and the Hoosier Trails Council in Bloomington, Indiana also use the name White Stag. These programs are not affiliated with the White Stag Leadership Development Program in California. The two Indiana councils' programs utilize the national council's National Youth Leadership Training curriculum.6465
References

See also

White stag
B&lt;U+00E9&gt;la A. B&lt;U+00E1&gt;n&lt;U+00E1&gt;thy
Magyar Cserk&lt;U+00E9&gt;szsz&lt;U+00F6&gt;vets&lt;U+00E9&gt;g

External links

[http://whitestag.org/| White Stag Leadership Development]
White Stag Leadership Academy
White Stag Crew 122

Portions of this article are based upon material originally written by Brian T. Phelps and licensed for use in Wikipedia under the GFDL.

Category:Outdoor education Category:Scouting Category:Youth organizations based in California Category:Non-profit organizations based in California Category:Organizations established in 1958 Category:Youth organizations Category:Scout leader training Category:Youth organizations based in the United States



↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
Youth Leadership Foundation↩
↩
↩
Youth Leadership Foundation Inc.↩
↩
White Stag Crew 122↩
White Stag Leadership Academy↩
↩
↩

↩
↩
↩

↩
↩
↩
↩




↩



↩

↩

↩
↩


↩
↩

↩

↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩


↩
↩
↩



↩
↩
↩


