
 Partick station is a combined railway station and underground station in the Partick area of Glasgow, Scotland. It, along with an adjacent bus station, forms one of the main transport hubs in Glasgow with regular services to many locations in Greater Glasgow and wider Strathclyde. The station was one of the first to receive bilingual English and Gaelic signs, because there is a significant Gaelic-speaking population in the Partick area.1
History
The first station in the area was the North British Railway's , opened in 1887 slightly to the north of the existing site on the opposite side of the Dumbarton Road. Soon after, the Glasgow Subway opened and its Merkland Street station, slightly to the south of the existing station site, opened in December 1896. Neither was independently known as &quot;Partick station&quot; as there were two other railway stations in Partick between the late 19th and mid-20th centuries:  (later renamed Kelvin Hall station) to the east with  and  to the west.
Argyle Line opening
The Beeching Axe of the 1960s closed  and , both on the Lanarkshire and Dunbartonshire Railway link to the Stobcross Railway and Glasgow Central Railway, leaving just the two stations in Partick, with Partickhill station - which escaped closure owing to being on the newly electrified (1960) North Clyde line from Queen Street Low Level, served by the 'Blue Trains', with a major pre-electrification refurbishment in 1958. It stood a few hundred yards north of Merkland Street. The amalgamation of the two stations to a single site came in 1979, as a major refurbishment of the Glasgow Subway coincided with the Greater Glasgow Passenger Transport Executive's decision to reopen part of the Glasgow Central Railway, which had been axed by Beeching, as the Argyle Line and connecting it to the North Clyde system just east of Partick. Both stations were closed (Merkland Street had been since the Subway works began in May 1977, whilst Partickhill remained in service for several months after the Argyle Line opened, until replaced by the current Partick station) and replaced with a new combined Partick station in the middle. The platforms at Partickhill are still visible from the North Clyde/Argyle Line, although access to Dumbarton Road is now blocked. The Merkland Street station buildings are no longer visible.
The station is one of the primary stations on the Argyle Line and North Clyde Line of the Glasgow suburban rail network. These lines primarily provide services to the east and west although the station itself is orientated north-south with two platforms. Statistically, it is the tenth busiest railway station in Scotland2 and the fifth busiest passenger interchange when subway and bus journeys from the site are included.
Services
Partick station is on a busy section of the Strathclyde rail network, served by all services on the Argyle Line and North Clyde Line.
Eastbound Argyle Line trains serve  and , before continuing to , ,  via  or , as well as . Eastbound North Clyde Line trains operate to , ,  eastbound, via . Westbound services operate to  and  via , and to .
Many journeys that interchange between the Argyle and North Clyde lines require passengers to change at Partick, as it is the closest station to central Glasgow with direct services to both  and  main line stations.
November 1979 (from opening of Argyle Line)
There were 15 trains per hour at opening of the Argyle Line in November 1979.

2 tph  to , via  and 
1 tph  to , via  and 
2 tph  to , via  and 
1 tph  to , via  and 
1 tph  to , limted stop via 
2 tph  to 
2 tph  to , limited stop
2 tph  to  via 
2 tph High Street to 

2010/11 (From 12 December 2010)
There are a total of 14 trains per hour, off-peak, in each direction.

2 tph  to , via 
2 tph  to , via 
2 tph  to  (limited stop)
2 tph  to  (limited stop)
2 tph  to , via Singer (limited stop)
1 tph  to , via  and 
1 tph  to , via  and 
1 tph  to , via 
1 tph  to , via 




Subway station

Partick subway station is one of the largest stations on the Glasgow Subway network, and has around 1.01 million boardings per year.1 This is due in part to its situation within the city and also the National Rail network. Partick is a relatively large population centre of Glasgow housing around 100,000 people, a significant number of whom use the subway to commute to the city centre.
Furthermore, Partick station is an interchange for two lines on the National Rail network. People commuting from outside of Glasgow to one of the areas covered by the underground network may choose to continue their journey from Partick to allow for ease of transfer between the services and to avoid a lengthy walk between (for example) Glasgow Central and St. Enoch.
It is one of only three with a dual side platform layout (the others being Govan and St Enoch). The rest have either a single central platform covering both circles or two platforms with a track running at the same side of each. The new Partick station replaced Merkland Street, which was located to the south, after modernisation. It should not be confused with the old Partick Cross subway station which is now known as Kelvinhall and is the station directly preceding or following Partick, depending upon the direction of travel.
It is the only station on the Subway that interchanges directly with a railway station, although Buchanan Street station is linked to Queen Street by a length of moving walkway. St. Enoch once shared this distinction, before its parent St Enoch railway station was closed and demolished in the 1960s.
Partick is one of three subway stations on the SPT Subway line to benefit from mobile telephone service nodes, the others being Buchanan Street and Hillhead. These nodes allow users of the O2 cellular network to use their mobile telephones while waiting on a subway train. The idea was to trial the technology at the busiest stations and, if successful, to put similar devices at each station eventually extending service across the entire network. As yet, the trial is incomplete.




Modernisation
2005-2009 project
 Strathclyde Passenger Transport began planning an extensive modernisation of the Partick station site - which had remained largely unchanged since its opening in 1979 - as early as 1998. Work began in late 2005 and was originally scheduled for completion in January 2007. However, delays to the project resulted in this date being put back on a number of occasions. The demolition and construction work was carried out while the site remained open to avoid any disruption in rail and underground services, arguably one of the most ambitious attributes of the project.3
The total cost of the project was estimated to be around &lt;U+00A3&gt;12.3 million with professional fees and third-party costs accounting for &lt;U+00A3&gt;2.6 million of this. However due to delays in the progression of the works and unforeseen difficulties - such as ground conditions on the land the station occupies, only discovered after the commencement of work - the company in charge of the development, C Spencer Construction, made a claim for a further &lt;U+00A3&gt;6.3 million.4
In early 2009, the project finally reached its conclusion and on 31 March, the new station was officially opened to the public. The work done includes the construction of a completely new and modern station building which incorporates a brand new ticket office (which has been in use since 2008). The station concourse has been completely renovated and new signs have been posted similar to those seen in  and Queen Street stations. Both railway platforms have been refurbished and now have their own indoor waiting rooms. Lifts linking the concourse to the National Rail platforms were installed.5
2012-2013 project
The Subway platforms were renovated between summer 2012 and spring 2013 at a cost of &lt;U+00A3&gt;1.2 million. All floor, wall, and ceiling finishes were replaced with new contemporary designs. Improved lighting, signage, and facilities for disabled people were introduced.6
Lifts linking the concourse to the Subway platforms were be installed as part of this project because the necessary land is not owned by SPT. The future provision of lifts has, however, been safeguarded.7
References
Notes

Sources





Location of Partick station on navigable OS map


Category:Railway stations in Glasgow Category:Railway stations opened by British Rail Category:Railway stations opened in 1979 Category:SPT railway stations Category:Railway stations served by First ScotRail



The Gaels In Glasgow↩
The usage information (Station Entries and Station Exits) is based on ticket sales in the financial year 2002/03 and covers all National Rail stations. Continued usage notes, and Excel format table for all stations available.↩
Clyde Waterfront↩
Evening Times Online, Cost of Partick station revamp soars by &lt;U+00A3&gt;6.3m, published 12 May 2008↩
Partick Interchange Rebuilding SPT microsite (preserved at archive.org)↩
http://www.spt.co.uk/2012/06/partick-subway-station-to-get-1-2-million-upgrade/↩
http://www.spt.co.uk/documents/rtp300312_agenda12.pdf↩


