



The Hong Kong Special Administrative Region of the People's Republic of China ( [pronunciation]), commonly known as Hong Kong1 (), is one of the two special administrative regions (SARs) of the People's Republic of China (PRC), the other being Macau. Comprising over 260 islands, the territory is located on the eastern banks of the Pearl River Delta, facing the South China Sea in the south and bordering Guangdong Province in the north.
Hong Kong was a crown colony of the United Kingdom from 1842 until the transfer of sovereignty to the People's Republic of China in 1997. The Sino-British Joint Declaration and the Basic Law of Hong Kong stipulate that Hong Kong will operate with a high degree of autonomy until at least 2047, fifty years after the transfer. Under the policy of &quot;one country, two systems&quot;, the People's Republic of China is responsible for the territory's defence and foreign diplomacy, while Hong Kong maintains its own legal system, currency, customs policy, police force, passport, cultural delegation, international sports teams, and immigration laws.
History

The area now known as Hong Kong became an important trading region and a significant strategic location for the Chinese mainland during the Tang and Song dynasties. These populated townships or villages had never been collectively known as Hong Kong before the British settlement arrived. The area began to attract the attention of China and the rest of the world again in the 19th century, when it was ceded to Britain after the Opium Wars. Hong Kong's earliest recorded non-Asian visitor was the Portuguese mariner Jorge &lt;U+00C1&gt;lvares who arrived in 1513. &lt;U+00C1&gt;lvares began trading with the Chinese, and the Portuguese continued to make periodic trade stops at various locations along the coast.
 The Portuguese introduced tea, silk, and other Asian luxury goods to Europe and by the mid-18th century these items were in high demand, particularly tea. The British, to redress their net outflow of payments to China for tea and to force China to conduct relations like other states, invaded China, winning the First Opium War in 1841. During the war, Victoria Island was first occupied by the British, and then formally ceded from the Qing Dynasty of China in 1842 under the Treaty of Nanking.
Hong Kong became a Crown Colony in 1843 with the first urban settlement in Victoria City (now called Admiralty). The Kowloon Peninsula south of Boundary Street and Stonecutter's Island was ceded to the British in perpetuity in 1860 under the Convention of Peking after China's defeat in the Second Opium War. Expansive adjacent lands to the north, known as the New Territories (including New Kowloon and Lantau Island), were then leased by Britain from China for 99 years, from 1 July 1898 to 30 June 1997. For the first 20 years there was little contact between the European and Chinese communities. The first specially-recruited Hong Kong civil servants to be taught Cantonese were recruited in 1862, markedly improving relations.
 Hong Kong entered a Dark Age during the Japanese Occupation of World War II, which lasted for three years and eight months after British and Canadian defenders were rooted out in an invasion that begun on 8 December 1941. The Japanese army executed many Hong Kongers during the war. There was a significant resistance movement most notably on Lantau Island during the occupation. After their defeat by the Allied forces, the Japanese surrendered the territory on 15 August 1945. Hong Kong quickly re-opened under British rule and welcomed a mass migration of Chinese refugees in 1949, many of whom were desperately escaping the newly-formed Communist government in China. Some of these refugees were capitalists and wealthy professionals, those deemed as class enemies of communism. Their migration helped Hong Kong acquire a pool of entrepreneurial talent which, in turn, planted the seeds for the territory's budding capitalist system.
Hong Kong had been a trade port ever since the British occupation, but its position as an entrep&lt;U+00F4&gt;t declined greatly after the United Nations ordered a trade embargo against the People's Republic of China during the Korean War. Many of Hong Kong's businesses had relied on trade with China and were forced to adapt to the loss of trade under the embargo. As a result, a textile and manufacturing industry was established, taking advantage of a new pool of workers from China willing to work for low wages. During this period, the economy grew extremely rapidly, deeming what many observers described as an &quot;economic miracle&quot;. Towards the 1970s, Hong Kong's economy began to move away from the textile and manufacturing industry and began to emphasize development of its financial and banking sector. Leading to even greater growth, Hong Kong quickly became one of the wealthiest cities in the world. Its position as an entrep&lt;U+00F4&gt;t was revived when the Open Door Policy was adopted by the PRC in the late-1970s under Deng Xiaoping reopening China to international trade. Further trade with mainland China was facilitated when Shenzhen, a city north of Hong Kong, was converted into a capitalist hub and declared a Special Economic Zone in 1979. Ever since, Shenzhen has served as a vital partner in Hong Kong's economic development and helping to integrate Hong Kong into China's burgeoning market economy.
In the 1980s, with the lease on the New Territories running out, the United Kingdom Government, led by then Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher, decided to negotiate the question of the sovereignty of Hong Kong. Although the British were only legally required to transfer the New Territories to the PRC under the Treaty of Nanking and the Convention of Peking, Whitehall decided that maintaining a rump colony would not be worthwhile &lt;U+2014&gt; the majority of Hong Kong's land was in the New Territories, and failure to return the entire colony would undoubtedly have generated political friction between the UK and PRC. Furthermore, many believed it was impractical and logistically impossible to dissect Hong Kong, with its industrial base in the New Territories returning to the PRC, while the British retained its commercial base on Victoria Island or commonly known as Hong Kong Island. Interesting idea had came up by the British side, such as exchanging sovereignty of the whole colony for administration right by the UK for fifty years. The Chinese side flatly rejected the British proposal.
 
Pursuant to an agreement known as the Sino-British Joint Declaration, signed by the People's Republic of China and the United Kingdom on 19 December 1984, the whole territory of Hong Kong under British colonial rule became the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region of the PRC on 1 July 1997. In the Joint Declaration, the PRC promised that under the &quot;One Country, Two Systems&quot; policy proposed by Deng Xiaoping, the socialist economic system in mainland China would not be practiced in Hong Kong, and Hong Kong's previous capitalist system and lifestyle would remain unchanged for at least 50 years, until 2047. Hong Kong would enjoy a high degree of autonomy in all matters except diplomatic affairs and national defence .
The Joint Declaration came into particular focus in June 1989 when the PRC applied deadly force against pro-democracy demonstrators in Tiananmen Square and elsewhere in Beijing. The loss of life in the Chinese capital provoked literally millions of Hong Kongers to protest openly in the streets. Concern over Hong Kong's future led to a decline in the stock market, general disquiet amongst the populace and a wave of migration to overseas destinations, particularly Canada and Australia.
Administration of Hong Kong was transferred to the PRC at midnight on 1 July 1997, with the last Hong Kong governor, Chris Patten, leaving on the Royal Yacht with HRH Prince Charles and British Prime Minister Tony Blair. Patten's successor, shipping tycoon Tung Chee Hwa, was handpicked by Beijing and sworn in as the territory's first Chinese leader. Soon after the handover in July, land values in Hong Kong collapsed substantially and expedited the burst of the bubble economy, as part of the Asian financial crisis. This was exacerbated by Tung Chee Hwa's unsubstantiated pledge to supply 85,000 new flats annually2; which essentially manipulated the region's real-estate prices. In some areas, land values fell by over half; and the Hang Seng Index fell by over 1,500 points on 28 October 1997, losing 22.8% of its value in a week.
On 6 July 1998, Hong Kong's new international airport opened after six years of construction priced at $20 billion. It is considered the last British design and equipped infrastructure built before leaving the territory. Built on an artificially created island in Chek Lap Kok, the airport, the Tsing Ma Bridge and a subway line connecting the airport to the rest of the city were together billed as the most expensive public project in history. Despite logistical problems during its first few months of operation, the airport today is considered one of the world's finest according to Skytrax magazine. The airport replaced the aging and overcrowded Kai Tak airport where aircraft famously made rooftop landings over dense skyscrapers in Kowloon. Hong Kong was hit badly by the outbreak of the SARS virus beginning in mid-March through the summer of 2003. This exacerbated the region's economic problems, especially in the effect that it had on travel to and from Hong Kong. thumb|200px|right|An evening in Central, Hong Kong's financial district. Within a lifetime, Hong Kong has matured from a provincial colonial outpost to an ultramodern global capital of trade and finance.
On 1 July the same year, half a million people marched in the largest protest rally ever aimed at the government of Hong Kong, voicing concerns about a proposed anti-subversion bill that would have eroded freedom of the press, of religion and of association arising from Article 23 of the Hong Kong Basic Law, as well as dissatisfaction with the poor state of the economy. Regina Ip, then Secretary for Security, and Antony Leung, then Financial Secretary, were forced to leave office in 2003 under public pressure (though Antony Leung left office for reason unrelated to the SARS and Article 23 crisis, he gave in to public pressure after his involvement in the Lexusgate scandal).
On 10 March 2005, Tung Chee Hwa submitted his resignation as Chief Executive of Hong Kong. Although Hong Kong's Basic Law permitted him to serve another three years, many suspected Beijing forced Tung to resign due to widespread public disapproval and his perceived lacklustre leadership. Donald Tsang, the Chief Secretary for Administration of Hong Kong, served as Acting Chief Executive until 25 May, when he, too, resigned to take part in the campaign for the new Chief Executive election. Following an interim government headed by Henry Tang, Tsang was elected as Chief Executive.
On 12 September 2005, Hong Kong Disneyland finally opened to the public on Lantau Island with jubilant fanfare after six years of planning and construction. Many believed the park would attract increased tourism dollars to Hong Kong and cement the city's status as a world class metropolis. However, many criticised the government's decision to subsidise part of the $3.5 billion construction price tag, the park's lower-than-expected attendance and poor park management.
Politics and government
 
Pursuant to Basic Law, Hong Kong's constitutional document, the local Hong Kong government retains sovereignty over the territory except in areas of national defence and foreign relations. Only the Chief Executive, Hong Kong's head of government, is appointed by Beijing. All other functionaries of the government, including members the executive and legislative branch, are either appointed by the Chief Executive (directly or by proxy) or elected by voters. In theory, this arrangement guarantees Hong Kong is governed almost independently of the PRC and can retain its unique cultural, legal and economic infrastructure. In practice, however, some have accused Beijing of excess intrusion into Hong Kong domestic affairs beyond levels permitted under Basic Law.
Laws in Hong Kong are enacted only by approval of the Chief Executive and majority consent from the 60 seat Legislative Council of Hong Kong, or Legco. Despite the often said undemocratic nature of Hong Kong's government, half of Legco's seats are elected under universal suffrage with the other half selected by functional constituencies consisting of trade unions and special interests. Basic Law guarantees that all seats will eventually be elected under universal suffrage.  
Donald Tsang currently holds the office of the Chief Executive after his election on 16 June 2005 by an electoral committee appointed by Beijing 3. Before the 1997 handover, Tsang had held the post of Chief Secretary for Administration under British rule. He was elevated to his current post on 24 June 2005 and is scheduled to complete the remaining portion of Tung Chee Hwa's last term which ends on 30 June 2007 in accordance to the interpretation of Annex I and Article 46 by the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress.
The election of a new Chief Executive by the 852-member Election Committee was expected to be held on 10 July 2005. On 16 June 2005, Donald Tsang was acclaimed the winner as the only candidate securing the required 100 nominations from members of the election committee. Tung Chee Hwa, the first Chief Executive, assumed office on 1 July 1997, following his election by a 400-member electoral college. For the second five-year term of the Chief Executive which began in July 2002, Tung was the only nominated candidate and therefore acclaimed.
The PRC set up a Provisional Legislative Council (PLC) in 1996 just before the handover, where it moved to Hong Kong to have its meetings after the handover. It reverted some laws passed by the colonial Legislative Council, which was formed by means of universal suffrage since 1995. The PLC passed some new laws, such as the Public Order Ordinance,4 which required permission from police to hold a demonstration where the number of people who participates exceeds 30. Legislative Council elections were held on 24 May 1998, on 10 September 2000 and again on 12 September 2004, with the next election scheduled for 2008. According to the Basic Law, Hong Kong's &quot;mini-constitution&quot;, the present third term of the Legislative Council has 25 seats directly elected from geographical constituencies and 30 seats elected from functional constituencies. The 1998, 2000 and 2004 Legislative Council elections were seen as free, open, and widely contested, despite discontent among mainly 'pro-democratic' politicians, who contended that the functional constituency elections and the Election Committee elections (for 1998 and 2000) were undemocratic, as they consider that the electorate for these seats is too narrow.
The civil service of Hong Kong maintains its quality and neutrality following its tradition in the colonial times, operating without discernible direction from Beijing. Many government and administrative operations are located in Central on Hong Kong Island near the historical location of Victoria City, the site of the original British settlements.
 The right of abode issue sparked debates in 1999, while the controversy over Hong Kong Basic Law Article 23 was the focus of politics in Hong Kong between 2002 and 2003, culminating in a peaceful mass demonstration (over 500,000 demonstrators) on 1 July 2003, after which the government still tried to pass the law to the Legislative Council. But one of the major pro-government parties refused to vote for passing the bill. Thus the government found that the bill could not be passed. So it shelved5 the drafted law6 brought forth by Article 23. The focus of controversies shifted to the issue of universal suffrage towards the end of 2003 and in 2004, which was the slogan of another mass demonstration on 1 July 200478.
On 24 September 2005, 25 Hong Kong pro-democracy Legco members, some of whom were previously labelled as traitors by Beijing after the 1989 Tiananmen Square crackdown and barred from entering the mainland, crossed the border into the southern province of Guangdong, following an unprecedented invitation by the PRC.9 The invitation was generally regarded as one of the greatest goodwill gestures from the PRC to the Hong Kong democrats since the Tiananmen Square massacre.
On 4 December 2005, a demonstration was organised by the Civil Human Rights Front and pro-democracy lawmakers to demand a timetable for universal suffrage to be included in political reform proposals for the 2007 and 2008 elections for the Chief Executive and the Legislative Council respectively. The turnout was reported to be 63,000 by the police, and at least 250,000 by the organisers. The proposals would have doubled the size of the election committee (from 800 members to 1,600) and added ten seats to the Legislative Council (5 geographic and 5 functional seats for district councillors). On 22 December 2005, the reforms, proposed by the Chief Executive of Hong Kong, Donald Tsang, were defeated by the pro-democracy camp after they failed to reach the necessary two-third threshold with 34 votes in favour and 24 opposed. In the wake of the defeat, China and the Chief Executive have indicated that reforms will not be possible until the 2012 elections. The defeat also did little to blunt Tsang's popularity, with his approval ratings only dropping from 82 to 79% in the wake of the vote.
Although Hong Kong is not an independent country, it retains its own delegation in international organizations such as the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation and the Olympic Games (although it changed its name from &quot;Hong Kong&quot; to &quot;Hong Kong, China&quot; after 1997). Hong Kong also participates in international events by including a delegate with the PRC's representative group.
Legal system and judiciary
 
In contrast to mainland China's civil law system, Hong Kong continues to follow the common law tradition established by British colonial rule. Article 84 of the Basic Law of Hong Kong allows Hong Kong's courts to refer to decisions (precedents) rendered by courts of other common law jurisdictions. Articles 82 and 92 allow invite judges from other common law jurisdictions to participate in proceedings of Hong Kong's Court of Final Appeal and sit as Hong Kong judges.
Structurally, Hong Kong's court system consists of the Court of Final Appeal which replaced the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council, the High Court, which is made up of the Court of Appeal and the Court of First Instance, and the District Court, which includes the Family Court. Other adjudicative bodies include the Lands Tribunal, the Magistrates' Courts, the Juvenile Court, the Coroner's Court, the Labour Tribunal, the Small Claims Tribunal, and the Obscene Articles Tribunal, which is responsible for classifying non-video pornography to be circulated in Hong Kong. Justices of the Court of Final Appeal are appointed by Hong Kong's Chief Executive. The Basic Law of Hong Kong is subject to interpretation by the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress (NPC:SC) and this power has been invoked three times: the right of abode issue, an interpretation regarding post-2008 election procedures, and an interpretation regarding the length of the term of the Chief Executive.
As in England, lawyers in Hong Kong are classified as either barristers or solicitors, where one can choose to practice as either one but not both (but it is possible to switch from one to another and vice versa). The vast majority of lawyers are solicitors, who are licensed and regulated by the Law Society of Hong Kong. Barristers, on the other hand, are licensed and regulated by the Hong Kong Bar Association. Only barristers are allowed to appear in the Court of Final Appeal and the High Court. Just as the common law system is maintained, so are British courtroom customs such as the wearing of robes and wigs by both judges and lawyers.
Geography
 
Hong Kong primarily consists of Hong Kong Island, Lantau Island, Kowloon and the New Territories (see map below). The Kowloon Peninsula is attached to the New Territories to the north, and the New Territories spans northwards eventually connecting with mainland China across the Sham Chun River (Shenzhen River). In total, Hong Kong encompasses a collection of 262 islands in the South China Sea, of which Lantau is the largest. Hong Kong Island is the second largest island and the most populated. Ap Lei Chau is the most densely populated island in the world.
The name &quot;Hong Kong&quot;, literally meaning &quot;fragrant harbour&quot;, is derived from the area around present-day Aberdeen and Wong Chuk Hang on Hong Kong Island where fragrant trees were once abundant and widely exported. The narrow body of water separating Hong Kong Island and Kowloon Peninsula, Victoria Harbour, is one of the deepest natural maritime ports in the world.Despite Hong Kong's reputation of being intensely urbanized, the territory has been called one of the greenest cities in Asia.10. Most of the territory remains undeveloped as the terrain is mostly hilly to mountainous with steep slopes. Of the territory's 1,104 square kilometres (426 square miles)11, less than 25% is developed. The remaining land is remarkably green with about 40% of landmass reserved as country parks and nature reserves12. Most of the territory's urban development exists on Kowloon peninsula, along the northern shores of Hong Kong island and in scattered settlements throughout the New Territories.
Hong Kong's long, irregular and curvaceous coastline also affords the territory with many bays, rivers and beaches. Despite the territory's extensive wooded and ocean setting, environmental awareness is growing as Hong Kong's air ranks as one of the most polluted. Approximately 70&lt;U+2013&gt;80% of the city's smog originates from other parts of the Pearl River Delta.
Hong Kong is 60 kilometres (37 miles) east of Macau on the opposite side of the Pearl River Delta and borders the city of Shenzhen in Guangdong Province to the north. The highest point in the territory is Tai Mo Shan, at a height of 958 metres (3,142 ft) above sea level. Lowlands exist in the northwestern part of the New Territories.
Climate

Hong Kong's climate is subtropical and prone to monsoons. It is cooler and dry in the wintertime which lasts from around January to March, and is hot, humid and rainy from spring through summer. It is warm, sunny, and dry in autumn. Hong Kong occasionally has typhoons in the summer and early autumn. The ecology of Hong Kong is mostly affected by the results of climatic changes. Hong Kong's climate is seasonal due to alternating wind direction between winter and summer. Hong Kong has been geologically stable for millions of years, though landslides are common especially after rain. Flora and fauna in Hong Kong are altered by climatic change, sea level alternation and human impact.
The highest recorded temperature13 in Hong Kong is 36.1&lt;U+00B0&gt;C (97.0&lt;U+00B0&gt;F) while the lowest recorded temperature is 0.0&lt;U+00B0&gt;C (32.0&lt;U+00B0&gt;F). The average temperature in the coldest month, January, is 15.8&lt;U+00B0&gt;C (60.4&lt;U+00B0&gt;F) while the average temperature in the hottest month, July, is 28.8&lt;U+00B0&gt;C (83.8&lt;U+00B0&gt;F). The territory is situated south of the Tropic of Cancer which is approximate to Hawaii in latitude. In winter, strong and cold winds generate from the north cool the city; in the summer, the wind's direction reverses and brings the warm and humid air in from the south. This climate can support a tropical rainforest.



Administrative divisions
  Hong Kong consists of 18 administrative districts:
The New Territories

Islands
Kwai Tsing (Kwai Chung and Tsing Yi)
North
Sai Kung
Sha Tin
Tai Po
Tsuen Wan
Tuen Mun
Yuen Long

Kowloon

Kowloon City
Kwun Tong
Sham Shui Po
Wong Tai Sin
Yau Tsim Mong (Yau Ma Tei, Tsim Sha Tsui and Mong Kok)

Hong Kong Island

Central and Western
Eastern
Southern
Wan Chai

There are several cities and towns within Hong Kong, the largest of which include Kowloon, Victoria (Hong Kong Island), Tseun Wan New Town, and Sha Tin New Town. These entities, however, are not granted any formal administrative status and are either administered as parts of districts (e.g. Sha Tin New Town) or divided up amongst districts (e.g. Tsuen Wan New Town and Kowloon).
Economy
   Hong Kong's economy is considered a model of capitalism for its devotion to free trade, low taxes and government non-intervention. Nobel prize economist Milton Friedman frequently referred to Hong Kong when defending the merits of a free market system, a system that many believe vaulted Hong Kong from being a third-world shantytown to an international financial capital within a few decades. Boasting the world's most liberal economy14 and being a global centre of finance and trade, Hong Kong is China's richest region in terms of GDP per capita and gross metropolitan product figures.
Today, Hong Kong is the world's 11th largest trading entity and 13th largest banking centre.15. Hong Kong surged past New York in 2006 to become the world's second most popular place &lt;U+2014&gt; after London &lt;U+2014&gt; for companies to float new stock listings.16 According to the Index of Economic Freedom and the Economic Freedom of the World Report, it is the freest economy on Earth. Hong Kong is a rich city with a GDP per capita surpassing most Western nations'. To put in perspective Hong Kong's economic strength, its closest Chinese rival, Shanghai, has a GDP of &lt;U+00A5&gt;46,586 (ca. US$ 5,620) per capita in 2003, ranked no. 13 among all 659 Chinese cities. Hong Kong on the other hand, possessed an unparalleled GDP of &lt;U+00A5&gt;310,021 (ca. US$ 37,400), ranked #1 in Asia. It has one of the world's most and is a major international centre of finance and trade. The dominant presence of international trade is reflected in the number of consulates in the territory: as of December 2006, 114 countries maintained consulates or consulates-general in Hong Kong, more than any other city in the world. (Even New York City, host of the United Nations, has only 104 consulates.) The objective of Hong Kong's monetary policy is to maintain currency stability. Given the highly externally-oriented nature of the economy, this objective was further defined as a stable external value for the Hong Kong dollar in terms of a linked exchange rate against the US dollar at the rate of approximately HK$7.80 to one United States dollar until 2005, when it was allowed to trade within a band of HK$7.75–$7.85. Hong Kong has limited natural resources, and most food and raw materials must be imported. In fact, imports and exports (including re-exports) exceed the GDP of Hong Kong. Hong Kong has extensive trade and investment ties with the People's Republic of China which existed even before the handover on 1 July 1997. These ties and its autonomous status enable it to be the middleman between the Republic of China on Taiwan and the mainland. Flights, investment, and trade from Taiwan go through Hong Kong to get to the mainland. The service sector represented 86.5% of the GDP in 2001.17 The territory, with a highly sophisticated banking sector and good communication links, hosts the Asian headquarters of many multinational corporations.
At USD$36,50018 in 2006, the real per capita GDP of Hong Kong is somewhat higher than that of the four big economies of western Europe which is around USD $30,000. Growth averaged a strong 8.9% per annum in real terms in the 1970s and 7.2% p.a. in the 1980s. As the economy shifted to services (manufacturing currently accounts for just 4% of GDP), growth slowed to 2.7% p.a. in the 1990s, including a 5.3% decline in 1998, due to the Asian financial crisis' impact on demand in the region. Growth since 2000 has averaged 5.2% p.a. amid strong deflation.The economy rebounded rapidly, growing by 10% in 2000. A world-wide global downturn and the Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS) outbreak reduced economic growth to 2.3% in 2003. Thereafter, a boom in tourism from the mainland because of China's easing of travel restrictions, a return of consumer confidence, and a solid rise in exports resulted in the resumption of strong growth in late 2003 and 2004, with growth averaging 6.5% in the first half of 2005. To further increase economic co-operation between Hong Kong and the mainland, the Individual Visit Scheme was started on 28 July 2003, which allows travellers from some cities in mainland China to visit Hong Kong without an accompanying tour group. As a result, the tourism industry in Hong Kong is booming due to an exponential increase in the number of visitors from mainland China. The upsurge is also boosted by the recent opening of Hong Kong Disneyland Resort.
A revival in both external and domestic demand led to a strong upswing in growth in 2004, surging to 8.2% for the year. The domestic sector completely shrugged off its earlier sluggishness, and the general weakness of the Hong Kong dollar, when included with the still modest cost and price pressures in Hong Kong, has resulted in a strengthening in Hong Kong's external price competitiveness. In addition, Hong Kong's 68-month-long deflationary spiral, the longest and highest deflation according to Guinness World Records, ended in mid-2004, with consumer price inflation hovering at near zero levels.
Along with Singapore, South Korea and Taiwan, Hong Kong's fast-paced industrialisation earned it a place as one of the four original East Asian Tigers.
Hong Kong enjoys low rates of both personal and corporate taxation. Concerned at the territory's narrow tax base and the government's over-dependence on tax revenue from property transactions, the government is consulting the public on the proposed introduction of a Goods and Services Tax (GST). Initial popular reaction has been largely unfavourable, primarily because of concerns that it will impose an undue burden on the poorer members of society, and may also harm Hong Kong's attractiveness as a tourist destination.

Demographics
   
The population of Hong Kong increased sharply throughout the 1990s reaching 6.9 million in 2006. About 96% of Hong Kong's population is of Chinese descent, the majority of which are Cantonese with ethnic groups such as the Hakka and Teochew also substantially represented. Cantonese, a Chinese dialect commonly spoken in southern China, is Hong Kong's official dialect and spoken by an overwhelming majority of the local population. English is also an official language of Hong Kong and is widely spoken and used at the workplace by more than a third of the population. Signs displaying both Chinese and English are extremely common throughout the territory. Since the 1997 handover, new groups of mainland China immigrants have increased the ethnic diversity of the territory and intensified the usage of Mandarin, the official Chinese dialect of mainland China. With Hong Kong's integration into the mainland economy, local employers are increasingly seeking out Mandarin speakers.The remaining 4% of the population is composed of non-ethnic Chinese forming a highly visible group (see Lan Kwai Fong and Tai-Pan) despite their smaller numbers. Among these is a significant South Asian population, mostly Indians, Pakistanis and Nepalese with some of them born in Hong Kong and speaking fluent Cantonese although few are also literate in Chinese. Some Nepalese residing in Hong Kong are Gurkhas who, along with their families and descendants, chose to remain after their military and civil service to Britain. In addition, over 15,000 Vietnamese landing in Hong Kong as refugees have become permanent residents.
Approximately 130,000 Filipinos work in Hong Kong as foreign domestic helpers, commonly referred to locally as amahs, or feiyung. A smaller cadre of domestic workers originates from Indonesia. On Sundays and public holidays, tens of thousands of these non-Chinese workers, majority of whom are female, gather in public places to socialise and attend religious services mostly in Central (mainly Filipinos), Victoria Park (mainly Indonesians) and Tsimshatsui. There are also a large number of Europeans, North Americans, Australians, Japanese, and Koreans working in Hong Kong's commercial and financial sector, many of whom live in Mid-Levels, an upscale section of the city popular amongst expatriates. The top three points-of-origin for foreigners in Hong Kong are the Philippines (132,770), Indonesia (95,460), and the United States (31,330).  Considered as a dependency, Hong Kong is one of the most densely populated countries/dependencies in the world, with an overall density of more than 6,200 people per km&lt;U+00B2&gt;. Hong Kong has a fertility rate of 0.95 children per woman,19 one of the lowest in the world and far below the 2.1 children per woman required to sustain the current population. However, population in Hong Kong continues to grow due to the influx of immigrants from mainland China numbering approximately 45,000 per year. Life expectancy in Hong Kong is 81.6 years as of 2006. If Hong Kong was an independent country, it would rank fifth longest in the world.
Hong Kong's population is very unevenly distributed. It has an extremely dense urban core, normally associated with &quot;the city (&lt;U+5E02&gt;&lt;U+5340&gt;)&quot;, consisting of Kowloon and the north of Hong Kong Island, which is Central and Western District, Wan Chai District, Eastern District, Yau Tsim Mong District, Kowloon City District, Sham Shui Po District, Wong Tai Sin District, and Kwun Tong District. The rest is relatively sparsely populated, with millions of residents scattered irregularly thoroughout the New Territories, south Hong Kong island, Lantau Island and other outlying islands. An increasing amount of Hong Kongers are even living in Shenzhen, a Chinese city north of Hong Kong, and commuting across the border.
Education

 A former British colony, Hong Kong's education system is roughly based upon that of the United Kingdom, and in particular, the system used in England. At the higher education levels, both British and American systems exist. The University of Hong Kong (HKU), being the oldest institution of tertiary education in the territory, has traditionally been based on the British model but has switched to the American model in recent years. Second to HKU in terms of history, the Chinese University of Hong Kong (CUHK) follows the American model with a characteristically British college system. The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (HKUST) was established on the American model of higher education. There are nine public universities in Hong Kong, and a number of private higher institutions. Hong Kong's public schools are operated by the Education and Manpower Bureau of the Government of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region. 20 The system features a non-compulsory three-year kindergarten, followed by a compulsory six-year primary education, three-year junior secondary education; a non-compulsory two-year senior secondary education leading to the Hong Kong Certificate of Education Examinations and a two-year matriculation course leading to the Hong Kong Advanced Level Examinations. A new &lt;U+201C&gt;3+3+4&lt;U+201D&gt; senior secondary curriculum, consisting of a three-year junior secondary, three-year senior secondary and four-year undergraduate academic system, will be implemented from 2009 onwards. There are also tertiary institutions offering various Bachelor's, Master's, and Doctoral degrees, other higher diplomas, and associate degree courses.
Most comprehensive schools in Hong Kong fall under three categories: government schools (rare), subsidised schools and private schools. Subsidised schools are by far the most common type, and include government-aided and grant schools, run by charitable organisations often with religious affiliations (mostly Christian, but Buddhist, Taoist, Islamic and Confucian as well). Meanwhile, private schools, often run by Christian organisations, have admissions based on academic merit rather than on financial resources. Outside this system are the schools under the Direct Subsidy Scheme (DSS) and private international schools.
Culture

thumb|200px|A statue on the Avenue of Stars, a tribute to Hong Kong cinema.thumb|200px|On Queen's Road Central outside Lan Kwai Fong. Hong Kong culture is often referred to as a marriage between East and West, a tight cultural and bilingual arrangement evident throughout the territory.
Hong Kong is frequently described as a city where East meets West, a meeting reflected in its economic infrastructure, education, legal system and street culture. On one street corner, there may be traditional Chinese shops selling Chinese herbal medicine, Buddhist paraphernalia or bowls of synthetic shark fin soup. But around the next, one may find theatres showing the latest Hollywood blockbuster, a British-style pub, a Catholic Church or Ronald McDonald inviting passer-bys to a Big Mac. The territory's official language is Chinese and English; signs in both languages are omnipresent throughout Hong Kong. The government, police and most workplaces and stores conduct business bilingually. British rule may have ended a decade ago but Western culture is deeply ingrained in Hong Kong and coexists seamlessly with traditional philosophy and practices of the Orient.
Hong Kong has an active nightlife centred on two major entertainment districts, Lan Kwai Fong (Central) and Wan Chai. Both areas are frequented by expatriates and locals alike. For a more quiet evening, a trip to Victoria Peak offers a spectacular view of the city. There is also a promenade along the Tsim Sha Tsui waterfront, which is popular among young Chinese couples. Shopping, a form of entertainment for the people of Hong Kong, is even done at nighttime as evident in the Temple Street Night Market where one can also catch free performances of Peking opera.
The city's cosmopolitan flavour can also be seen in the wide variety of cuisines available. While different varieties of Chinese selections, especially seafood, are most popular, there are also many European, American, Japanese, Korean, and other restaurants. Ethnic dishes served in cha chaan teng and dai pai dong are also popular. The people of Hong Kong take their food seriously and many top chefs make their way to the city to show off their talents to these discerning diners.
While Hong Kong is a global centre of trade, perhaps the city's most famous export is its entertainment industry, particularly in the martial arts genre. Several top-notch Hollywood performers originate from Hong Kong cinema -- Bruce Lee, Chow Yun-Fat, Jackie Chan, Michelle Yeoh, Jet Li and Leslie Cheung, to name a few. Behind the camera, Hong Kong filmmakers have also struck fortune in Hollywood such as John Woo, Wong Kar-wai, Tsui Hark and martial arts choreographers who have designed fight scenes in the Matrix trilogy, Kill Bill and Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon. Back in Hong Kong, several homegrown films have also gained international recognition such as Chungking Express, Infernal Affairs, Shaolin Soccer, Rumble in the Bronx and In the Mood for Love. Acclaimed filmmaker Quentin Tarantino has said he's strongly influenced by Hong Kong action cinema.
The Hong Kong government also supports cultural institutions such as the Hong Kong Heritage Museum, Hong Kong Museum of Art, the Hong Kong Academy for Performing Arts and the Hong Kong Philharmonic Orchestra. Furthermore, the government's Leisure and Cultural Services Department also subsidizes and sponsors the bringing of international performers to Hong Kong.



General holidays and festivals



Date


English Name


Chinese Name


Remarks




Every Sunday


Sundays


&lt;U+6240&gt;&lt;U+6709&gt;&lt;U+661F&gt;&lt;U+671F&gt;&lt;U+65E5&gt;






January 1


The first day of January (New Year's Day)


&lt;U+4E00&gt;&lt;U+6708&gt;&lt;U+4E00&gt;&lt;U+65E5&gt; (&lt;U+5143&gt;&lt;U+65E6&gt;)






1st day of 1st moon (Lunar)


Lunar New Year's Day


&lt;U+8FB2&gt;&lt;U+66C6&gt;&lt;U+5E74&gt;&lt;U+521D&gt;&lt;U+4E00&gt;


Usually in late January or early February
Most important holiday




2nd day of 1st moon (Lunar)


The second day of the Lunar New Year


&lt;U+8FB2&gt;&lt;U+66C6&gt;&lt;U+5E74&gt;&lt;U+521D&gt;&lt;U+4E8C&gt;






3rd day of 1st moon (Lunar)


The third day of the Lunar New Year


&lt;U+8FB2&gt;&lt;U+66C6&gt;&lt;U+5E74&gt;&lt;U+521D&gt;&lt;U+4E09&gt;






April 5 (April 4 on leap years)


Ching Ming Festival


&lt;U+6E05&gt;&lt;U+660E&gt;&lt;U+7BC0&gt;


About 15 days after Vernal Equinox
Day for paying respect to the deceased






Good Friday


&lt;U+8036&gt;&lt;U+7A4C&gt;&lt;U+53D7&gt;&lt;U+96E3&gt;&lt;U+7BC0&gt;








The day following Good Friday


&lt;U+8036&gt;&lt;U+7A4C&gt;&lt;U+53D7&gt;&lt;U+96E3&gt;&lt;U+7BC0&gt;&lt;U+7FCC&gt;&lt;U+65E5&gt;








Easter Monday


&lt;U+5FA9&gt;&lt;U+6D3B&gt;&lt;U+7BC0&gt;&lt;U+661F&gt;&lt;U+671F&gt;&lt;U+4E00&gt;






May 1


Labour Day


&lt;U+52DE&gt;&lt;U+52D5&gt;&lt;U+7BC0&gt;






8th day of 4th moon (Lunar)


The Buddha's Birthday


&lt;U+4F5B&gt;&lt;U+8A95&gt;


Usually in May
New holiday established in 1998; general not statutory




5th day of 5th moon (Lunar)


Dragon Boat Festival (Tuen Ng Festival)


&lt;U+7AEF&gt;&lt;U+5348&gt;&lt;U+7BC0&gt;


Usually in June
Day for patriotic remembrance, eating cakes and dragon boat races




July 1


Hong Kong Special Administrative Region Establishment Day


&lt;U+9999&gt;&lt;U+6E2F&gt;&lt;U+7279&gt;&lt;U+5225&gt;&lt;U+884C&gt;&lt;U+653F&gt;&lt;U+5340&gt;&lt;U+6210&gt;&lt;U+7ACB&gt;&lt;U+7D00&gt;&lt;U+5FF5&gt;&lt;U+65E5&gt;






16th day of 8th moon (Lunar)


The day following the Mid-Autumn Festival


&lt;U+4E2D&gt;&lt;U+79CB&gt;&lt;U+7BC0&gt;&lt;U+7FCC&gt;&lt;U+65E5&gt;


Usually in September
Important autumn holiday for harvest and family gathering with eating of moon cakes and moon sightseeing




October 1


PRC's National Day


&lt;U+570B&gt;&lt;U+6176&gt;&lt;U+65E5&gt;


Usually two days: Oct 1 and 2




9th day of 9th moon (Lunar)


Chung Yeung Festival


&lt;U+91CD&gt;&lt;U+967D&gt;&lt;U+7BC0&gt;


Usually in October
Day for honouring the elderly, the deceased and for climbing mountains




December 21 or December 22


Dong Zhi (Winter solstice Festival)


&lt;U+51AC&gt;&lt;U+81F3&gt;


not an official holiday




December 25


Christmas Day


&lt;U+8056&gt;&lt;U+8A95&gt;&lt;U+7BC0&gt;






December 26


The first weekday after Christmas Day


&lt;U+8056&gt;&lt;U+8A95&gt;&lt;U+7BC0&gt;&lt;U+5F8C&gt;&lt;U+7B2C&gt;&lt;U+4E00&gt;&lt;U+500B&gt;&lt;U+5468&gt;&lt;U+65E5&gt;


Also called Boxing Day



Reference: General Holidays Ordinance

Religion

Hong Kong enjoys a high degree of religious freedom, a right enshrined and protected through its constitutional document, the Basic Law. The majority of Hong Kong's population, as in Mainland China, practice a folk version of Buddhism. A sizable Christian community of around 500,000 exists, forming about 10% of the total population; roughly equally divided between Catholics and Protestants. There are also around 200,000 followers each of authentic Buddhism and Taoism. Apart from the major religions, there are also a significant number of followers of other religions, including an estimated 3,000 Jews and a number of Muslims, Hindus, Sikhs and Bah&lt;U+00E1&gt;'&lt;U+00ED&gt;s. Apart from offering religious instructions, many major religious bodies have established schools and provided social welfare facilities.
Hong Kong's religious beliefs are tied to the region's early role as a fishing community. Tin Hau, the protector of seafarers, has been honoured with several temples throughout Hong Kong for at least 300 years. Hung Shing, another protector of seafarers, has also been honoured for centuries . Hongkongers, especially elder generations, visit Taoist or Buddhist temples to appease the deities and, usually, to request compassion, good health or good fortune. Gifts of food, and in particular fruit, are presented, and incense and paper offerings are burnt in respect.
With the transfer of Hong Kong to the PRC, there were significant concerns over religious freedom in Hong Kong. So far, this has proved mostly unfounded. Despite the banning of the Falun Gong movement by Beijing in 1999, adherents are still free to practice in Hong Kong. Similarly, the Catholic Church freely appoints its own bishops in Hong Kong, unlike on mainland China where the only approved 'Catholic' institution is the Chinese Patriotic Catholic Association where bishops and priests are appointed by Beijing (though there is also an unofficial and illegal part of the Catholic church that maintains contact with the Vatican). A significant issue in the normalisation of ties between the PRC and the Vatican is Beijing's insistence that the Vatican drops its diplomatic ties with the ROC.
Architecture
 
Due to the creative destruction so endemic to Hong Kong over the past 50 years, few historical buildings remain in Hong Kong. Instead the city has become a centre for modern architecture, especially in and around Central. Dense commercial skyscrapers between Central and Causeway Bay lining the coast of Victoria Harbour is one of Hong Kong's most famous tourist attractions and ranked the best skyline in the world. Four of the top 15 tallest skyscrapers in the world are in Hong Kong. In Kowloon, which once included the anarchistic settlement called the Kowloon Walled City, strict height restrictions on structures were in force until 1998 with the closure of nearby Kai Tak Airport. With restrictions lifted, several new skyscrapers in Kowloon are being planned including International Commerce Centre which, when completed in 2010, will become the world's fourth tallest.

The Peak Tower at Victoria Peak 

Hong Kong's best-known building is arguably Ieoh Ming Pei's Bank of China Tower, completed in 1990 and now Hong Kong's third tallest skyscraper. The building attracted heated controversy from the start, as its sharp angles were said to cast negative feng shui energy into the heart of Hong Kong. Predating the Bank of China Tower, another well-known structure is the HSBC Headquarters Building, finished in 1985. It was built on the site of Hong Kong's first skyscraper, which was finished in 1935 and was the subject of a bitter heritage conservation struggle in the late 1970s. Both banks' buildings are featured on many of Hong Kong's banknotes.
The tallest building in Hong Kong is the International Finance Centre 2. One of the largest construction projects in Hong Kong and the world was the new Hong Kong International Airport on Chek Lap Kok near Lantau, a huge land reclamation project linked to the centre of Hong Kong by the Lantau Link, which features three new major bridges: Tsing Ma, the world's sixth largest suspension bridge; Kap Shui Mun, the world's longest cable-stayed bridge carrying both road and railway traffic; and Ting Kau, the world's first major four-span cable-stayed bridge.
Particularly notable about Hong Kong's skyline and streetscape is the omnipresence of public housing estates, which began as a squatter resettlement program in the 1950s, and now houses close to 50% of the population. These estates have evolved from seven-storey walk-up apartments with public toilets and minimal amenities, allocated on a basis of 24 square feet per adult, half of that for a child, to high-quality high-rises. The public rental program has been supplemented with a government-subsidized Home Ownership Scheme.

Transport

    Hong Kong has a highly developed and sophisticated transport network, encompassing both public and private transport. The Octopus card stored value smart card payment system can be used to pay for fares on almost all railways, buses and ferries in Hong Kong. The Octopus card uses RFID (Radio Frequency Identification) to allow users to scan their card without taking it out of their wallet or bag. All parking meters in Hong Kong accept payment by Octopus card only, and Octopus card payment can be made at various car parks.
Hong Kong is dominated by steep, hilly terrain, and some unusual methods of transport have been devised to ease movement up and down the slopes. For example, the Peak Tram has provided vertical rail transport between Central and Victoria Peak since 1888 by steeply ascending the side of a mountain. In Central and Western district there is an extensive system of escalators and moving sidewalks, including the longest outdoor covered escalator system in the world, the Mid-levels Escalator. And on Lantau Island, the newly constructed Ngong Ping Skyrail service traverses over dense mountainous terrain with aerial cable cars to link Tung Chung Town Centre with Ngong Ping.
Hong Kong has several different modes of public rail transport. The two metro systems for the city are the MTR (Mass Transit Railway) and KCR which acts as a link between Hong Kong and mainland China (KCR also operates a light rail system in northwest New Territories). These are operated by the MTR Corporation Limited and the Kowloon-Canton Railway Corporation respectively. The tramway system covers the northern parts of Hong Kong Island and is the only tram system in the world run exclusively by double deckers.
Five separate companies operate franchised public bus services in Hong Kong. Double-decker buses were introduced to Hong Kong in 1949. They are now used almost exclusively in Hong Kong, just as in Dublin and the United Kingdom. However, single-decker buses remain in use for routes with lower demand or roads with lower carrying capacity. Such single-decker buses are mainly used on Lantau Island and for overnight services. Most normal franchised bus routes in Hong Kong operate until 1 am. Public light buses run the length and breadth of Hong Kong, through areas where standard bus lines cannot reach or do not reach as frequently, quickly, or directly. Taxis are also widely used throughout Hong Kong. 99% of taxis in Hong Kong run on liquefied petroleum gas; the rest are still diesel operated.
Most ferry services are provided by licensed ferry operators serving outlying islands, new towns, across Victoria Harbour, Macau and cities in mainland China. The oldest service, the legendary Star Ferry, operates four lines between Kowloon and Hong Kong Island and has provided cost-effective transport for over a century. Popular with tourists desiring a panoramic view of Hong Kong's skyline and harbour, many Hong Kongers consider the Star Ferry as one of the city's most treasured cultural icons. Additionally, 78 &quot;kai-to&quot; ferries are licensed to serve remote coastal settlements.
Hong Kong has one active international airport, known as Hong Kong International Airport located at Chek Lap Kok. This replaced the famous Kai Tak Airport located in Kowloon in 1998. After high-profile delays in the cargo systems in the first few months, the airport now serves as a transport hub for Southeast Asia, and as the hub for Cathay Pacific Airways, Dragonair, Air Hong Kong, Oasis Hong Kong Airlines, Hong Kong Airlines and Hong Kong Express. Additionally, both Hong Kong International Airport and Cathay Pacific Airways have been voted best in the world, in the airport and airline criteria respectively, by Skytrax from 2001 to 2005. Hong Kong International Airport served more than 36 million passengers in the year 2004, and increased to over 40 million passengers in 2005.
Access to the airport includes 'Airport Express', 'CityFlyers' and 'Airbuses'. These services connect the airport to the rest of Hong Kong. The Airport Express zooms passengers to Central on Hong Kong Island in just 23 minutes. The recent opening of Sunny Bay Station of the MTR allows easy access to the Disneyland Resort.
While the traffic in mainland China drives on the right, Hong Kong still maintains its own road rules, with traffic continuing to drive on the left. There are about 517,000 registered vehicles in Hong Kong, 64% of which are privately owned passenger cars. As a metropolis for luxury in Asia, Hong Kong is world famous for having the most Rolls-Royce cars per capita in the world.21 Note that the Hong Kong highway code uses the same road sign system as Great Britain whereas the Chinese system is different.
Military
  Hong Kong has never had its own military forces because it has never been a sovereign state, except voluntary auxiliary force like The Royal Hong Kong Regiment (The Volunteers). All defence matters have been dependent on the state which controls Hong Kong. Before the British handover to PRC sovereignty, defence was provided by the British military, who stationed soldiers in barracks throughout Hong Kong, including the British Forces Overseas Hong Kong. Its finance was supported by the Hong Kong Government.
The People's Republic of China Central People's Government (CPG) assumed sovereignty over Hong Kong on 1 July 1997 and stationed a garrison of the People's Liberation Army (PLA) to manage its defence affairs. Although the garrison has little practical military value, the stationing of the PLA troops in Hong Kong is a significant symbol of the PRC government's assumption of sovereignty over Hong Kong.
According to Hong Kong's Basic Law, military forces stationed in Hong Kong shall not interfere with local civil affairs; the Hong Kong Government shall remain responsible for the maintenance of public order. The Hong Kong Garrison, composed of ground, naval, and air forces, is under the command of the Chinese Central Military Commission. The garrison subsequently opened its barracks on Stonecutters Island and Stanley to the public to promote understanding and trust between the troops and residents.
Under British rule, ethnic Chinese Hong Kong residents (and other Hong Kong residents) were able to join the British Forces Overseas Hong Kong. However, since the handover in 1997, no Hong Kong resident is allowed to join the PLA.
International rankings

Table of Hong Kong International Rankings


Date
Context
Organization
Ranking
Note




2001-05
World's Best Airports
Skytrax
1/155 countries
Ranked 1st out of 155 countries


2002-04
Ranking of Container Ports of the World
AAPA World Port Rankings
1/10 ports
Ranked 1st out of 50 largest ports in the world


2002
Ranking of IQ
University of Ulster
1/185 countries
Ranked 1st out of 185 countries


2005
Networked Readiness Index (NRI)
World Economic Forum
11/115 countries
Ranked 11th out of 115 countries


2006
6th Annual Global e-Government Study (Brown University)
Global e-Government
20/198 Countries
Ranked 20th out of 198 countries


2006
Annual Worldwide Press Freedom Index 2006
Reporters without borders
59/168 Countries
Ranked 59th out of 168 countries


2006
Corruption Perceptions Index
Transparency International
15/163 Countries
Ranked 15th out of 163 countries


2006
Index of Economic Freedom
Heritage Foundation/The Wall Street Journal: 2006
1/157 Countries
Ranked 1st out of 157 Countries for 11 years in a row.


2005
Worldwide quality-of-life index
The Economist
18/111 Countries
Ranked 18th out of 111 countries


2006
World Competitiveness Yearbook 2006
IMD International
2/61 Economies
Ranked 2nd out of 61 economies (countries and regions)


2006
World City's Skyline/Skyscrapers
Emporis Data Committee (EDC)
1/100 Major cities
Ranked #1 out of all the major cities in the World. This listing ranks cities by the visual impact of their skylines.


2006
Global Competitiveness Report - Growth Competitiveness Index Ranking
World Economic Forum
11/125 Countries
Ranked 11th out of 125 countries


2006
World's Best Airports
Skytrax
2/155 countries
Ranked 2nd out of 155 countries


2006
Business Competitiveness Index - BCI
World Economic Forum
10/121 countries
Ranked 10th out of 121 countries


2006
Human Development Index - HDI
United Nations
22/177 countries
Ranked 22nd out of 177 countries


2006
Access Index (p.19)
FedEx: The Power of Access - 2006 Access Index
1/75 Countries
Ranked 1st out of 75 countries


2006
Potential Competitiveness
Japan Center for Economic Research (JCER)
1/50 Countries
Ranked 1st out of 50 countries



References

A History of Hong Kong(Third Edition). Frank Welsh. HarperCollins. 1 October 1998. 624 pages. ISBN 1-56836-002-9.
Mathematical Modelling of Hong Kong Political and Economical Development. Derek Lam. Guangzhou Academic Press. 18 February 1986. 23 pages.
Hong Kong's History: State and Society Under Colonial Rule (Asia's Transformations). Tak-Wing Ngo. Routledge. 1 August 1999. 205 pages. ISBN 0-415-20868-8.
The Cinema of Hong Kong: History, Arts, Identity. Poshek Fu, David Deser. Cambridge University Press. 25 March 2002. 346 pages. ISBN 0-521-77602-3.
A Modern History of Hong Kong. Steve Tsang. I.B. Tauris. 14 May 2004. 356 pages. ISBN 1-86064-184-9.
An Outline History of Hong Kong. Liu Shuyong. 291 pages. ISBN 7-119-01946-5.
Forts and Pirates - A History of Hong Kong. Hong Kong History Society. Hyperion Books. December 1990. ISBN 962-7489-01-8.

Footnotes



While the names of most cities of the PRC are romanised into English using Pinyin, the official English name is Hong Kong rather than'' Xi&lt;U+0101&gt;ngg&lt;U+01CE&gt;ng''. See Pronunciation of &quot;Hong Kong&quot; for details.

See also

External links





WikiSatellite view of Hong Kong at WikiMapia
CIA - The World Factbook — Hong Kong

Tourism

Hong Kong Tourism Board
Official Hong Kong Immigration Department Visa Information

Government

GovHK, the new one-stop portal of the HKSAR Government
Hong Kong SAR Government, the official government site
Hong Kong Immigration Department - HKSAR Passport
District Councils, the official district councils site
Hong Kong Fact Sheets (quick facts about Hong Kong)
Hong Kong Legislative Council, the site of the legislative body
Discover Hong Kong, the official site of the Hong Kong Tourism Board
GoHK, the Home Affairs Department site for local tourists
List of Graded Historical Buildings in Hong Kong - 6 Jan 2007 from the Antiquities and Monuments Office
List of Declared Monuments in Hong Kong - 3 March 2006 from the Antiquities and Monuments Office

Television

TVB, the biggest TV company
ATV, one of two free TV broadcasters
Cable TV, the biggest paid cable provider in Hong Kong
Now TV - IPTV provider

Radio

Radio Television of Hong Kong - public broadcaster
Hong Kong Commercial Radio - largest commercial broadcaster

Newspapers

Oriental Daily - Biggest Chinese newspaper in terms of circulation
Apple Daily - Second best selling Chinese newspaper
Ming Pao - Reputable Chinese newspaper
Hong Kong Economic Times - Largest Chinese Financial Newspaper
South China Morning Post - Largest English newspaper
Metro Newspaper, Hong Kong edition
The Standard - English-language business newspaper

Magazines

Next Magazine, a popular Chinese language entertainment and lifestyle magazine
BC Magazine, HK Magazine - English language entertainment magazine targeted at expatriates

Photos

Flickr - photos tagged with Hong Kong
Global Photos - gallery of Hong Kong photos
UnRealHongKong - Hong Kong historical photos

Guides and directories

HK Outdoors - about Hong Kong's countryside

Locale














ar:&lt;U+0647&gt;&lt;U+0648&gt;&lt;U+0646&gt;&lt;U+063A&gt; &lt;U+0643&gt;&lt;U+0648&gt;&lt;U+0646&gt;&lt;U+063A&gt; an:Hong Kong zh-min-nan:Hiong-k&lt;U+00E1&gt;ng bs:Hong Kong bg:&lt;U+0425&gt;&lt;U+043E&gt;&lt;U+043D&gt;&lt;U+043A&gt;&lt;U+043E&gt;&lt;U+043D&gt;&lt;U+0433&gt; ca:Hong Kong cs:Hongkong cy:Hong Kong da:Hongkong de:Hongkong et:Hongkong el:&lt;U+03A7&gt;&lt;U+03BF&gt;&lt;U+03BD&gt;&lt;U+03B3&gt;&lt;U+03BA&gt; &lt;U+039A&gt;&lt;U+03BF&gt;&lt;U+03BD&gt;&lt;U+03B3&gt;&lt;U+03BA&gt; es:Hong Kong eo:Honkongo eu:Hong Kong fa:&lt;U+0647&gt;&lt;U+0646&gt;&lt;U+06AF&gt;&lt;U+200C&gt;&lt;U+06A9&gt;&lt;U+0646&gt;&lt;U+06AF&gt; fr:Hong Kong ga:Hong Kong gd:Hong Kong gl:Hong Kong - &lt;U+9999&gt;&lt;U+6E2F&gt; zh-classical:&lt;U+9999&gt;&lt;U+6E2F&gt; ko:&lt;U+D64D&gt;&lt;U+CF69&gt; hi:&lt;U+0939&gt;&lt;U+094B&gt;&lt;U+0928&gt;&lt;U+094D&gt;&lt;U+0917&gt; &lt;U+0915&gt;&lt;U+094B&gt;&lt;U+0928&gt;&lt;U+094D&gt;&lt;U+0917&gt; hr:Hong Kong io:Hong Kong ilo:Hong Kong id:Hong Kong ia:Hong Kong is:Hong Kong it:Hong Kong he:&lt;U+05D4&gt;&lt;U+05D5&gt;&lt;U+05E0&gt;&lt;U+05D2&gt; &lt;U+05E7&gt;&lt;U+05D5&gt;&lt;U+05E0&gt;&lt;U+05D2&gt; jv:Hong Kong ka:&lt;U+10F0&gt;&lt;U+10DD&gt;&lt;U+10DC&gt;&lt;U+10D9&gt;&lt;U+10DD&gt;&lt;U+10DC&gt;&lt;U+10D2&gt;&lt;U+10D8&gt; sw:Hong Kong la:Hongcongum lv:Honkonga lb:Hong Kong lt:Honkongas li:Hong Kong hu:Hongkong mk:&lt;U+0425&gt;&lt;U+043E&gt;&lt;U+043D&gt;&lt;U+0433&gt; &lt;U+041A&gt;&lt;U+043E&gt;&lt;U+043D&gt;&lt;U+0433&gt; mi:Hongipua ms:Hong Kong nl:Hongkong ja:&lt;U+9999&gt;&lt;U+6E2F&gt; no:Hongkong nn:Hongkong ug:&lt;U+0634&gt;&lt;U+064A&gt;&lt;U+0627&gt;&lt;U+06AD&gt;&lt;U+06AF&gt;&lt;U+0627&gt;&lt;U+06AD&gt; nds:Hongkong pl:Hongkong pt:Hong Kong ro:Hong Kong ru:&lt;U+0413&gt;&lt;U+043E&gt;&lt;U+043D&gt;&lt;U+043A&gt;&lt;U+043E&gt;&lt;U+043D&gt;&lt;U+0433&gt; sq:Hong Kong simple:Hong Kong sk:Hongkong sl:Hong Kong sr:&lt;U+0425&gt;&lt;U+043E&gt;&lt;U+043D&gt;&lt;U+0433&gt;&lt;U+043A&gt;&lt;U+043E&gt;&lt;U+043D&gt;&lt;U+0433&gt; sh:Hong Kong fi:Hongkong sv:Hongkong tl:Hong Kong th:&lt;U+0E40&gt;&lt;U+0E02&gt;&lt;U+0E15&gt;&lt;U+0E1A&gt;&lt;U+0E23&gt;&lt;U+0E34&gt;&lt;U+0E2B&gt;&lt;U+0E32&gt;&lt;U+0E23&gt;&lt;U+0E1E&gt;&lt;U+0E34&gt;&lt;U+0E40&gt;&lt;U+0E28&gt;&lt;U+0E29&gt;&lt;U+0E2E&gt;&lt;U+0E48&gt;&lt;U+0E2D&gt;&lt;U+0E07&gt;&lt;U+0E01&gt;&lt;U+0E07&gt; vi:H&lt;U+1ED3&gt;ng K&lt;U+00F4&gt;ng tr:Hong Kong uk:&lt;U+0413&gt;&lt;U+043E&gt;&lt;U+043D&gt;&lt;U+043A&gt;&lt;U+043E&gt;&lt;U+043D&gt;&lt;U+0491&gt; zh-yue:&lt;U+9999&gt;&lt;U+6E2F&gt; zh:&lt;U+9999&gt;&lt;U+6E2F&gt;
Category:1997 establishments Category:Anglo-Chinese relations Category:APEC Category:Asia Category:British rule in Hong Kong Category:Chinese-speaking countries and territories Category:Cities in China Category:Coastal cities Category:Former British colonies   Category:Hong Kong-related lists Category:Metropolitan areas of China Category:Pearl River Delta Category:Port cities Category:Ports and harbours of the People's Republic of China Category:Special territories Category:Seaports



The name is often written as Hongkong in older English texts. The Hong Kong Government officially adopted the current form on 3 September 1926. (Hongkong Government Gazette, Notification 479, 3 September 1926)↩
Hong Kong's Residential Property: Prices are Likely to Have Bottomed, Hong Kong Trade Development Council, 06-07-2000. Retrieved on 29-01-2007.↩
&quot;Donald Tsang set to be HK leader&quot;, BBC News, 15 June 2005. Retrieved 14 May 2006.↩
Hong Kong Public Order Ordinance, World Corporal Punishment Research, February 2000. Retrieved 14 May 2006.↩
Presentation to Legislative Council on Right of Abode Issue, Hong Kong Human Rights Monitor, 1999-5-10. Retrieved 2007-1-20.↩
&quot;Right of Abode in HKSAR &lt;U+2014&gt; Verification of Eligibility for Permanent Identity Card&quot;, The Government of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region &lt;U+2014&gt; Immigration Department, last revision: 1 May 2006. Retrieved 27 May 2006.↩
&quot;Hong Kong: Calls for Universal Suffrage Unabated&quot;, T-Salon, 20 October 2004. Retrieved 27 May 2006.↩
Third annual report by the European Commission on the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, 2001-7-25. Retrieved 2007-1-20.↩
&quot;Hong Kong democrats visit China&quot;, ABC News Online, September 25, 2005. Retrieved May 27, 2006.↩
&quot;Chief Executive pledges a clean, green, world-class city&quot;, Hong Kong Trader, November 2001. Retrieved 27 May 2006.↩
↩
&quot;Hong Kong Hiking Tours&quot;, The Hong Kong Tourism Board's Hiking page. Retrieved 18 June 2006.↩
&quot;Extreme temperatures around the world&quot;, mherrera.org. Retrieved 27 May 2006.↩
↩
&quot;About Hong Kong&quot;, Government Information Centre↩
Hong Kong surpasses New York in IPOs, International Herald Tribune, 2006-12-25. Retrieved 2007-1-20.↩
&quot;Hong Kong Country Commercial Guide inc Macau 2004: Economic Trends&quot;, Strategis, 24 July 2003. Retrieved 27 May 2006.↩
Rank Order - GDP - per capita (PPP), CIA Factbook. Retrieved on 29-01-2007.↩
&quot;Hong Kong Total fertility rate&quot;, Index Mundi. Retrieved 27 May 2006↩
Education for Non-Chinese Speaking Children, Education and Manpower Bureau, Government of HKSAR. (PDF File)↩
World-famous producer of luxury cars launches first Hong Kong showroom, InvestHK, 2003-7-30. Retrieved 2007-1-20.↩


