 Homosexuality in speculative fiction refers to the incorporation of gay themes into science fiction or fantasy fiction. Such elements may include an LGBT character as the protagonist or a major character, or explore the varieties of sexual experience that deviate from the conventional.
As genres of popular literature, science fiction and fantasy often seem even more constrained than non-genre literature by their conventions of characterization and the effects that these conventions have on depictions of sexuality and gender. On the other hand, science fiction and fantasy can also to promise more freedom than do non-genre literatures to imagine alternatives to the privileged assumptions of heterosexuality and masculinity that suffuse many cultures.1
In speculative fiction, extrapolation allows writers to focus not on the way things are (or were), as non-genre literature does, but on the way things could be different. It provides science fiction with a quality that science fiction critic Darko Suvin has called, &quot;cognitive estrangement,&quot; the recognition that what we are reading is not the world as we know it, but a world whose change forces us to reconsider our own with an outsider's perspective.2 When the extrapolation involves sexuality or gender, it can force the reader to reconsider his or her heteronormative cultural assumptions. In science fiction, such estranging features include technologies that significantly alter sex or reproduction. In fantasy, such features include figures, such as mythological deities and heroic archetypes, who are not limited by preconceptions of human sexuality and gender, allowing them to be reinterpreted. 3
Author and editor Nicola Griffith has written that GLBT readers tend to identify strongly with the outsider status of mutants, aliens, and characters who lead hidden or double lives in science fiction.4

Homosexuality in SF Literature
Uranian Worlds, by Eric Garber and Lyn Paleo is an authoritative guide to science fiction literature up to 1989 featuring gay, lesbian, transgender, and related themes. The book covers science fiction literature published before 1990, providing a short review and commentary on each piece.5
True History by the Greek writer Lucian (A.D. 120-185) has been called the first ever gay science fiction story.6 The narrator is suddenly enveloped by a typhoon and swept up to up to the moon, which is inhabited by a society of men that are at war with the sun. After distinguishing himself in combat, the king gives the hero his son the prince in marriage. The all male society reproduces (male children only) by giving birth from the thigh or by growing a child from a plant produced by planting the left testicle in the moon's soil.78
Homosexuality during the Pulp era (1920-30s)

Cover of first edition of Odd John (1935)

Prior to the 1960s, explicit sexuality of any kind was not characteristic of science fiction and fantasy. Although the covers of some 1930s pulp magazines showed scantily clad women menaced by tentacled aliens, the covers were often more lurid than the magazines' contents. For many years, the editors who controlled what was published felt that they had to protect the adolescent male readership that they identified as their principal market. In such a context, writers like Edgar Pangborn who featured passionate male friendships in their work, were exceptional; almost until the end of their careers, including so much as a kiss would have been too much.
As the demographics of the readership broadened, it became possible to include characters who were more or less undisguised homosexuals, but these, in accordance with the attitudes of the times, tended to be villains: evil, demented, or effeminate stereotypes. The most popular role for the homosexual was as a decadent slaveholding lordling whose corrupt tyranny was doomed to be overthrown by the young male heterosexual hero.9. During this period, lesbians were almost entirely unrepresented as either heroes or villians.10
One of the earliest examples of genre science fiction that involves a challenging amount of unconventional sexual activity is the early science fiction novel Odd John (1935), by Olaf Stapledon. John is a mutant with extraordinary mental abilities who will not allow himself to be bound by many of the rules imposed by the ordinary British society of his time. The novel strongly implies that he has consensual intercourse with his mother Pax and that he seduces an older boy who becomes devoted to him but also suffers from the affront that the relationship creates to his own morals.
Homosexuality during the Golden Age (1940-50s)

June 1953's issue of Universe

As the readership for science fiction and fantasy began to age in the 1950s, however, writers like Philip Jose Farmer and Theodore Sturgeon were able to introduce more explicit sexuality into their work. Sturgeon wrote many stories during the Golden Age of Science Fiction that emphasised the importance of love, regardless of the current social norms. In his short story The World Well Lost (1953), first published in Universe magazine and collected in A Saucer of Loneliness, homosexual alien fugitives and unrequited (and taboo) human homosexual love are portrayed. The tagline for the Universe cover was &quot;[His] most daring story&quot;11; Its sensitive treatment of homosexuality was unusual for science fiction published at that time.
Sturgeon would later write Affair with a Green Monkey, which examined social stereotyping of homosexuals, and in 1960 published Venus Plus X, in which a single-gender society is depicted and the protagonist's homophobia portrayed unfavourably.12
Although not usually identified as a genre writer like Sturgeon, William S. Burroughs in 1959 published Naked Lunch, the first of many works such as The Nova Trilogy and The Wild Boys in which he linked drug use and homosexuality as anti-authoritarian activities. The result was a surreal narrative that estranged the action from the ordinary world as science fiction and fantasy do.
Until the late 1960s, however, few other writers depicted alternative sexuality or revised gender roles with Sturgeon's tolerance for the alternative or Burroughs's intolerance for the ordinary. Images of homosexual male societies remained strongly negative in the eyes of most SF authors. For example, when overpopulation drives the world away from heterosexuality in Charles Beaumont's short story The Crooked Man (1955), first published in Playboy inhumane homosexuals begin to oppress their heterosexual minority. In Anthony Burgess&lt;U+2019&gt; The Wanting Seed (1962) homosexuality is required for official employment, part of an unnatural state of affairs along with by failing of the natural world and violent warfare.13
Homosexuality during the New Wave era (1960-70s)
By the late 1960s, science fiction and fantasy began to reflect the changes prompted by the civil rights movement and the emergence of a counterculture. Within the genres, these changes were incorporated into a movement called &quot;the new wave,&quot; a movement more skeptical of technology, more liberated socially, and more interested in stylistic experimentation. New wave writers were more likely to claim an interest in &quot;inner space&quot; instead of outer space. They were less shy about explicit sexuality and more sympathetic to reconsiderations of gender roles and the social status of sexual minorities. Notable openly gay male authors included Thomas M. Disch and Samuel R. Delany. Under the influence of New wave editors and authors such as Michael Moorcock (editor of the influential New Worlds) and Ursula K. Le Guin, sympathetic depictions of alternative sexuality and gender multiplied in science fiction and fantasy. Joanna Russ's The Female Man (1975) and the award winning story When It Changed, showing a female-only lesbian society that flourished without men, was also enourmously influential. 
In the earliest stories of Samuel R. Delany, the gay sexual aspect appears as a &quot;sensibility&quot;, rather than in overt sexual references. Nova (1968) is the first major science fiction novel with a gay male protagonist, nominated for a Hugo award and listed by critic David Pringle as one of the 100 best SF novel from 1949 to 1984.14 In some stories, such as Babel-17 (1966), same-sex love and same-sex intercourse are clearly implied but are given a kind of protective colouration because one character is a woman who is involved in a three-person marriage, the other two members of which are males. The affection all three characters share for each other is in the forefront, and sexual activity between or among them is not directly described. In later works, Delany blurs the line between science fiction and gay pornography.
Nebula-winning short story Aye, and Gomorrah, which posits the development of neutered human astronauts and then depicts the people who become sexually oriented toward them. By imagining a new gender and resultant sexual orientation, the story allows readers to reflect on the real world while maintaining an estranging distance. Further award winning stories featuring gay characters, such as Time Considered as a Helix of Semi-Precious Stones were to follow (all collected in Delany's short story retrospective Aye, and Gomorrah, and other stories).15
In his most famous science fiction novel entitled Dhalgren (1975), Delany spots his large canvas with characters of a wide variety of sexualities.16 Once again, sex activity is not the focus of the novel although there are some of the first explicitly described scenes of gay sex in SF. Delany depicts, mostly with affection, characters with a wide variety of motivations and behaviors, not, it would seem, with the intent of a kind of covert advocacy but with the effect of revealing to the reader the fact that these kinds of people exist in the real world.
In Time Enough for Love by Robert A. Heinlein (1973), the main character argues strongly for the future liberty of homosexual sex. Ursula K. Le Guin explored trans-species sexuality in The Left Hand of Darkness (1969), the sexuality of species in which individuals are neither &quot;male&quot; nor &quot;female&quot; but normally have both male and female sexual organs and reproductive abilities. Le Guin has subsequently written many stories that examine the posibilities SF allows for non-traditional homosexuality, such as the sexual bonding between clones in Nine Lives (collected in The Wind's Twelve Quarters).17
Elizabeth Lynn's Chronicles of Tornor novels (1979-80), the first of which won the World Fantasy Award, were among the first fantasy novels to have gay relationships as an unremarkable part of the cultural background.
Modern Gay SF (Post New Wave)
After the pushing back of boundaries in the 1960s and 70s, homosexuality gained much wider acceptance, and was often incorporated into otherwise conventional SF stories with little comment. This was helped by the growing number of openly gay or lesbian authors,18 such as David Gerrold and Geoff Ryman. In the 1980s blatant homophobia was no longer considered acceptable to most readers.19
 Gay characters became common enough that Diana Wynne Jones' The Tough Guide to Fantasyland contains an entry on gay mages as a fantasy cliche.20 Such characters are found in Mercedes Lackey's works,21 such as the Lambda award winning The Last Herald Mage Trilogy (1989), in which the protagonists are gay,22 and have magical powers. Their relationships are an integral part of the story, which takes places in the fictional world of Valdemar.
Lois McMaster Bujold's Ethan of Athos tells of a reproductive scientist on a planet with no women.
In the Mythopoeic award winning Unicorn Mountain (1988), Michael Bishop includes a gay male AIDS patient among the carefully drawn central characters who must respond to an irruption of dying unicorns at their Colorado ranch. The death of the hedonistic gay culture and safe-sex campaign resulting from the AIDS epidemic are also explored, both literally and metaphorically.
Anne McCaffrey's Dragonriders of Pern series contains a society with a hierarchy partially based on the sexual partnerings of dragons. When dragons mate, their riders do the same. As most riders are male, homosexuality is common.
David Gerrold's young adult series starts with Jumping Off the Planet (2000), in which a father kidnaps his three sons and goes to the moon; one is gay. Gerrold received a Nebula award for a short story The Martian Child (1994). He later expanded it to book length; a feature film is expected in 2007. The story is semi-autobiographical: a gay man adopts a child.
Duane Simolke received a StoneWall Society award for Degranon: A Science Fiction Adventure (2004), which includes gay themes and characters, and is a prominent example of SF produced by a specialist publishing house for gay readers rather than for SF fans.
LGBT SF and the science fiction community
 At least as early as the 1980 Worldcon (Noreascon Two), there were gatherings of gay and gay-friendly members of the SF community, including Samuel R. Delany, Marion Zimmer Bradley and Melissa Scott 23. Members of science fiction fandom (including Forrest J Ackerman) were involved in the foundation of early groups such as the Daughters of Bilitis, a lesbian rights group.
By 1988, the first Gaylaxicon science fiction convention was held. This led to the creation of the Gaylactic Network and the Gaylactic Spectrum Awards by the science fiction community.24 Gay-themed discussions are now a staple at conventions such as WisCon; For example, WisCon 30 featured a panel discussing &quot;Why Women Write About Gay Men.&quot;
Awards

The Gaylactic Spectrum Awards honor works in science fiction, fantasy and horror which include positive explorations of gay, lesbian, bisexual or transgendered characters, themes, or issues.
The Lambda Literary Award includes an award for Science Fiction/Fantasy/Horror.
The Queer Horror Awards were created to honor works that involve significant, and generally positive, portrayal of gay, lesbian, bisexual or transgender characters, issues or themes within the area of horror.

Specialist LGBT presses
Some lesbian science fiction is targeted specifically to a lesbian audience, published by small feminist or lesbian presses such as Naiad Press (defunct) and Bella Books.
Comics and Manga


see also: LGBT characters in comics and Portrayal of lesbianism in comics


For much of the 20th century, gay relationships were discouraged from being shown in comics which were seen mainly as directed towards children. Until 1989 the Comics Code Authority, which imposed de facto censorship on comics sold through newsstands in the United States, forbade any suggestion of homosexuality.25 Artists had to drop subtle hints while not stating directly a character's orientation.26 Overt gay and lesbian themes were first found in underground and alternative titles which did not carry the CCA's seal of approval.
Marvel
Alpha Flight&lt;U+2019&gt;s Northstar was the first major gay character created by Marvel comics in 1979, as a member of the original Alpha Flight superhero team. Although Northstar's sexual identity was hinted at in 1983 in issues 7 and 8 of Alpha Flight, his apparent lack of interest in women was chalked up to his obsessive drive to win as a ski champion 27. The character was finally revealed to be gay in 1992's Alpha Flight issue 106.28
A relationship between the female Marvel comics characters Mystique and Destiny was only implied at first, then cryptically confirmed in 1990 through the use of the archaic word leman, meaning a lover or sweetheart.29 Only in 2001 was Destiny referred to in plain language as Mystique's lover.30
In 2002, Marvel Comics revived The Rawhide Kid in their Marvel MAX imprint,31 introducing the first openly gay comic book character to star in his own magazine.32 The first edition of the Rawhide Kid&lt;U+2019&gt;s gay saga was called Slap Leather. According to a CNN.com article, &lt;U+201C&gt;The new series pairs the original artist, John Severin, now 86, with Ron Zimmerman, a television writer. Making the Rawhide Kid homosexual was Zimmerman&lt;U+2019&gt;s idea.&quot;33. The character&lt;U+2019&gt;s sexuality is conveyed indirectly, through euphemisms and puns, and the comic&lt;U+2019&gt;s style is campy. 34
DC
DC feature a number of LGBT characters as superheroes in their comics.
Firebrand is an early example: A superhero published by Quality Comics, premiering in Police Comics no. 1 (August, 1941), Firebrand's costume included a transparent or pink shirt over bare chest. In All-Star Squadron #5 (1981) writer Roy Thomas penned thought balloons for that suggested Firebrand had been involved in a gay relationship with his sidekick and bodyguard Slugger Dunn. &quot;Good old Slugger! He's been Rod's bodyguard -- and his friend -- for years now -- though what a confirmed bachelor playboy like my brother needed with a bodyguard I've never understood!&quot; Gay topics were still largely taboo in mass-circulation comic books in 1981, and words such as &quot;confirmed bachelor&quot; and references to a closeted identity were as close as a writer could come to actually saying that a character was gay.
A more modern example is the violent vigilante superhero Midnighter. The Batman-like Midnighter was shown as being in a relationship with his Superman-like Apollo during their time as members of the superhero team The Authority.35 Midnighter and Apollo are now married and have an adopted daughter - Midnighter has gone on to star in his own title.
In 2006 DC Comics could still draw widespread media attention by announcing a new, lesbian incarnation of the well-known character Batwoman36 even while openly lesbian characters such as Gotham City police officer Renee Montoya already existed in DC Comics.37. Previously, WildStorm's Image Comics had featured Sarah Rainmaker of Gen&lt;U+00B9&gt;&lt;U+00B3&gt; as a character with an interest in other women, and had openly depicted homosexual relationships between the members of the Authority, such as Jenny Sparks and Swift.38
Yaoi and Yuri manga
  
Yaoi (&lt;U+3084&gt;&lt;U+304A&gt;&lt;U+3044&gt;) is a publishing genre which focuses on male/male relationships and is marketed at females. Anal sex is uniquitous. The genre originated in Japan and encompasses manga, anime, novels and d&lt;U+014D&gt;jinshi. In Japan, this genre is called &quot;Boys' Love&quot; and yaoi as a genre name is mostly used by western fans.39 Yaoi has spread beyond Japan; yaoi material is available in the United States, as well as other Western and Eastern nations worldwide. As with much manga and anime, SF and fantasy tropes and environments are common. For example Innocent Bird is a manga in which the main charcters are angels and demons. Ai no Kusabi is a 1980s yaoi light novel series involving a science fictional caste system. The characters of yaoi do not tend to self-identify as gay.
There is also &quot;gay manga&quot; specifically targeted at gay men, with gay characters. Yaoi writers and fans distinguish these &quot;gay manga&quot; as being separate from yaoi.40
The female (hence lesbian) counterpart of Yaoi is called Yuri. 4142 Yuri can focus either on the sexual or the emotional aspects of the relationship, the latter sometimes being called sh&lt;U+014D&gt;jo-ai by western fans.43 Although yuri originated in female-targeted works, today it is featured in male-targeted ones as well.4445
SF television and film
In general, SF on television and film has lagged behind literature in its portrayals of homosexuality. Sexual relationships in major SF franchises have generally been depicted as heterosexual in nature. Inter-species and inter-ethnic relationships have been commonly depicted, while homosexual and transgendered (LGBT) relationships are more rare. The platonic close male relationships in television and film science fiction have been reinterpreted by fans as slash fiction - Kirk/Spock being the earliest example.
Star Trek

The Star Trek franchise's lack of same-sex relationship has long been a sore spot with LGBT fandom,46 who point out that Gene Roddenberry had made statements in later life favourable to acceptance of homosexuality and the portrayal of same-sex relationships in Star Trek, but that the franchises coverage has remained meagre.47
Homosexuality has occasionally been treated as an &quot;issue&quot; within the new Star Trek franchises, to be dealt with as a theme in individual episodes, such as the 1992 Star Trek: The Next Generation episode &quot;The Outcast,&quot; and the 1995 Star Trek: Deep Space Nine episode &quot;Rejoined,&quot; which was the first to feature a same-sex relationship and romantic same-sex kiss between women. Subsequently, the Star Trek franchise has portrayed a few same-sex kisses, but always in the context of either the evil &quot;mirror universe&quot; (&quot;The Emperor's New Cloak&quot;) or body possession (&quot;Warlord&quot; and others), and often for comedic purposes between otherwise heterosexual characters.
In a 2000 ''Fandom ''interview, Star Trek screenwriter Ronald D. Moore suggested that the reason why no gay characters existed in the television franchise was because someone wanted it that way, and no amount of support from fans, cast or crew was going to make any difference.48
In recent years, a few of the Star Trek novels, which are officially licensed but not considered canon, have featured serious direct (not alternate-universe, not due to body possession, etc.) same-sex relationships, including portraying a minor canon character (Lieutenant Hawk from Star Trek: First Contact) as gay.
Torchwood

Torchwood is a British science fiction drama television programme, part of the long-running Doctor Who franchise, which began airing in 2006 on BBC Three.
Torchwood explores several themes in its narrative, in particular LGBT themes. Various characters are portrayed as sexually fluid; through those characters, the series examines homosexual and bisexual relationships. Although the nature of their sexual flexibility is not explicitly discussed, the characters offer varying perspectives on orientation.
List of SF books with major gay characters or themes
This is a sourced list of science fiction and fantasy novels, short story collections and anthologies that feature homosexual or male bisexual protagonists, or have major gay themes.












Author
Book
Year
Awards49
Details
Reference




Steve Berman
Vintage: A Ghost Story
2007
Andre Norton Award finalist
Gay. maj. cher. and other LGBT chars. 1/5 of proceeds go to gay charities.
{{cite web


Samuel R. Delany
Dhalgren
1975
Spectrum Hall of Fame, Nebula nominee
Bisexual maj. char. and other LGBT chars.
50


Lynn Flewelling
The Nightrunner series
1996-
-
Bisexual maj. char.
{{cite web


David Gerrold
Jumping off the Planet
2000-02
Golden Duck award, Spectrum award, Lambda nominee, Nebula nominee, HOMer nominee x 2
Gay sec. char. and other LGBT chars. Book one of The Dingilliad trilogy
{{cite web


David Gerrold
The Man Who Folded Himself
1973
Hugo nominee, Nebula nominee
Time travelling maj. char. has sex with him/herself
{{cite web


David Gerrold
The Martian Child
1994
Hugo award, Nebula award, Locus Award, HOMer award, Sturgeon nominiee
Gay maj. char. adopts a child
{{cite web


Joe Haldeman
The Forever War
1974
Hugo award, Nebula award, Locus award, Ditmar Award
Future gay society.
{{cite web


Mercedes Lackey
The Last Herald Mage trilogy
1989-91
Lambda award
Gay maj. char.
{{cite web


Anne Rice
The Vampire Chronicles
1976-99
-
Bisexual and gay vampires
{{cite web











See also



Sexuality in science fiction
Queer horror
Slash fiction
Femslash



Lists of gay, lesbian, or bisexual figures in fiction
List of lesbian science fiction
List of gay science fiction
List of LGBT figures in mythology


References

External links

GLBT Science Fiction and Fantasy Literature - A Web Directory
GLBT Science Fiction and Fantasy Resources
Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Transgender SF/F/H Bibliography
Alternative Sexualities in Science Fiction and Fantasy List
Lesbian Science Fiction
GLBTQ online encyslopedia


fr:Homosexualit&lt;U+00E9&gt; dans la science-fiction br:Skiant-faltazi lesbianel
Category:LGBT literature Category:Science fiction culture Category:Sexuality and society Category:In popular culture Category:LGBT literature Category:Lesbian fiction




Darko Suvin Metamorphoses of Science Fiction, Yale Univ Pr: 1979 ISBN-13: 978-0300023756↩
http://www.glbtq.com/literature/scifi_fantasy.html↩
Nicola Griffith, Stephen Pagel Bending the Landscape. Original Gay and Lesbian Writing: Science Fiction, Overlook Press: 1998 ISBN-13: 978-0879518561↩
Eric Garber, Lyn Paleo Uranian Worlds: A Guide to Alternative Sexuality in Science Fiction, Fantasy, and Horror, G K Hall: 1990 ISBN-13: 978-0816118328↩
Lynne Yamaguchi Fletcher The First Gay Pope and other records, Pg. 95, Alyson Publications: 1992 ISBN-13: 978-1555832063↩
Wayne R. Dynes, Warren Johansson, William A. Percy, Stephen Donaldson Encyclopedia of Homosexuality, Pg. 752, Garland Publishing Inc: 1990 ISBN-13: 978-0824065447↩

http://www.williamapercy.com/wiki/index.php/Encyclopedia_of_Homosexuality↩

http://www.spacedoutinc.org/DU-16/WorldWellLost.html↩


David Pringle, Science Fiction: The 100 Best Novels : An English-Language Selection, 1949-1984, Carroll &amp; Graf Publishers: 1997 ISBN-13: 978-0786704811↩

David Soyko, &quot;Dhalgren&quot;, on-line review (2002) SFSite↩



Diana Wynne Jones. The Tough Guide to Fantasyland. DAW (December 1, 1998). ISBN-13: 978-0886778323↩


Bacon-Smith, Camille. Science Fiction Culture, pp. 138-140↩
http://www.gaylacticnetwork.org/↩
↩
↩
http://www.rzero.com/books/gaysuperfull.html↩

Uncanny X-Men #265 (Early August, 1990).↩
X-Men Forever #5 (May, 2001).↩
http://www.cbsnews.com/stories/2002/12/11/entertainment/main532702.shtml↩
http://archives.cnn.com/2002/SHOWBIZ/12/09/rawhide.kid.gay/↩


↩
↩
↩
Jenny Sparks: The Secret History of the Authority, mini-series published in 2000↩

http://www.csuchico.edu/~mtoku/vc/Articles/toku/Wil_Toku_BoysLove.html↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩


http://www.locusmag.com/SFAwards/Db/NomLit0.html↩



