

style=&quot;font-size: large; margin: inherit;&quot;|T.F. South High School


colspan=&quot;2&quot; align=&quot;center&quot;; |












Name


Address


Town


Established


Communities


Type


Religion


Students


Grades


District


Teachers


Population


Nickname


Mascot


Colors


Newspaper


Yearbook


Website






Thornton Fractional Township South High School is a high school located in suburban Cook County, Illinois, located about 6 miles from the city limits of Chicago, 24 miles south of Downtown Chicago. Thornton Fractional Township South High School (commonly known as T.F. South) is one of three high schools in the Village of Lansing the others being Luther East and Illiana Christian high schools neither offer football.. The school serves an area of approximately 9 square miles, and serves over 1,600 students in grades 9-12 who reside in the near south suburban communities of Lansing and Lynwood.
The school's 2004-2005 enrollment was 1,669.
Location
The school is located on the corner of 186th Street and Burnham Avenue, providing easy access from two main streets. The official address for the school is 18500 Burnham Ave, Lansing, IL 60438
Athletics
T.F. South offers a range of Athletic activities for students including ten sports for boys and eleven for girls. The school competes in the SICA Central &amp; SICA Orange (Football) conferences.

Boys's Sports

Basketball
Swimming
Wrestling
Cross Country
Golf
Tennis
Track
Football
Baseball
Soccer
Volleyball



Girl's Sports

Basketball
Swimming
Bowling
Cross Country
Tennis
Volleyball
Badminton
Track
Softball
Cheerleading
Soccer


Notable Alumni

Thomas Burke Baldwin, professional football player
Curtis Granderson, professional baseball player1
Bret Kooi Head Football Coach Lockport Twp H.S, Lockport IL
Bert Kooi Head Football Coach Minooka H.S, Minooka IL
Harry Smith (television), television journalist
Pierre Thomas, University of Illinois football player; Signed with the New Orleans Saints in 2007 as unrestricted free agent 2
Ralph Seymour, Actor; Starred in Equus on Broadway and appeared in film and television, including the academy award-winning, Rain Man. 3

References



External Links

Official Website

Category:High schools in Illinois Category:Educational institutions established in 1958



↩
↩
↩


