
Diazepam (), marketed under brand names Valium&lt;U+00AE&gt;, Stesolid, Diazemuls, Seduxen, Bosaurin, Diapam, Antenex and Apozepam)1 is a drug which is a benzodiazepine derivative. It possesses anxiolytic, anticonvulsant, sedative, skeletal muscle relaxant and amnestic properties. This makes it a useful drug for treating anxiety, insomnia, seizures, alcohol withdrawal, and muscle spasms. It is also used before certain medical procedures (such as endoscopies) to reduce tension and anxiety, and in some surgical procedures to induce amnesia.23
Diazepam is a core medicine in the World Health Organization's &quot;Essential Drugs List&quot;, which is a list of minimum medical needs for a basic health care system.4 Diazepam is used to treat a wide range of conditions and is one of the most frequently prescribed benzodiazepines.
Benzodiazepine
Diazepam is a benzodiazepine that binds to a specific subunit on the GABAA receptor at a site that is distinct from the endogenous GABA molecule.56The GABAA receptor is an inhibitory channel which, when activated, decreases neurologic activity.
Due to the role of diazepam as a positive allosteric modulator of GABA, when it binds to benzodiazepine receptors it causes inhibitory effects. This arises from the hyperpolarization of the postsynaptic membrane, due to the control exerted over negative chloride ions by GABAA receptors.78
Diazepam appears to act on areas of the limbic system, thalamus and hypothalamus, inducing anxiolytic effects. Its actions are due to the enhancement of GABA activity.910
History
Diazepam was the second benzodiazepine to be invented by Leo Sternbach of Hoffmann-La Roche, and was approved for use in 1963. It is five times more potent than its predecessor, chlordiazepoxide, which it quickly surpassed in terms of sales. After this initial success, other pharmaceutical companies began to introduce other benzodiazepine derivatives.11
The benzodiazepines gained popularity among medical professionals as an improvement upon barbiturates, which have a comparatively narrow therapeutic index, and are far more sedating at therapeutic doses. The benzodiazepines are also far less dangerous; death rarely results from diazepam overdose, except in cases where it is consumed with large amounts of other depressants (such as alcohol or other sedatives).12
Diazepam was the top-selling pharmaceutical in the United States from 1969 to 1982, with peak sales in 1978 of 2.3 billion pills.13 In 1966, The Rolling Stones released the song &quot;Mother's Little Helper,&quot; which is about a mother needing the &quot;little yellow pill&quot; to get through the day.14
While psychiatrists continue to prescribe diazepam for the short-term relief of anxiety, neurology has taken the lead in prescribing diazepam for the palliative treatment of certain types of epilepsy and spastic activity, e.g., forms of paresis. It is also the first line of defense for a rare disorder called stiff-person syndrome.15 Diazepam is also found in nature. Several plants, such as potato and wheat, contain trace amounts of naturally occurring diazepam and other benzodiazepines.16
Pharmacokinetics
Diazepam can be administered orally, intravenously, intramuscularly, or as a suppository.17
When diazepam is administered orally, it is rapidly absorbed and has a fast onset of action. The onset of action is 1-5 minutes for IV administration and 15-30 minutes for IM administration. The duration of the diazepam's main pharmacological effects is 15 minutes to 1 hour for both routes of administration.18
Peak plasma levels are achieved 30 minutes to 2 hours after oral administration. When diazepam is administered as an intramuscular injection, absorption is slow, erratic and incomplete.1920
Diazepam is highly lipid-soluble, and is widely distributed throughout the body after administration. It easily crosses both the blood-brain barrier and the placenta, and is excreted into breast milk. After absorption, diazepam is redistributed into muscle and adipose tissue. Continual daily doses of diazepam will quickly build up to a high concentration in the body (mainly in adipose tissue), which will be far in excess of the actual dose for any given day.2122
Diazepam is metabolised in the liver via the cytochrome P450 enzyme system. It has a biphasic half-life of 1-2 and 2-5 days, and has several pharmacologically active metabolites. The main active metabolite of diazepam is desmethyldiazepam (also known as nordazepam or nordiazepam). Diazepam's other active metabolites include temazepam and oxazepam. These metabolites are conjugated with glucuronide, and are excreted primarily in the urine. Because of these active metabolites, the serum values of diazepam alone are not useful in predicting the effects of the drug.2324
Diazepam has a half-life (t1/2&lt;U+03B1&gt;) of 20-50 hours, and desmethyldiazepam has a half-life of 30-200 hours.25
Most of the drug is metabolised; very little diazepam is excreted unchanged.26
In humans, the protein binding of diazepam is around 98.5%.27
Indications
Diazepam is mainly used to treat anxiety, insomnia, and symptoms of acute alcohol or opiate withdrawal. It is also used as a premedication for inducing sedation, anxiolysis or amnesia prior to certain medical procedures (e.g. endoscopy).28
Diazepam is rarely used as a primary drug for the long-term treatment of epilepsy. This is due to the fact that tolerance to the anticonvulsant effects of diazepam usually develops within 6 to 12 months of treatment, effectively rendering it useless for this purpose.29
Diazepam has a broad spectrum of indications (most of which are off-label), including:

Treatment of anxiety, panic attacks, and states of agitation30


Treatment of status epilepticus, adjunctive treatment of other forms of epilepsy31


Treatment of the symptoms of alcohol and opiate withdrawal32


Short-term treatment of insomnia33


Treatment of tetanus, together with other measures of intensive-treatment34


Initial management of mania, together with firstline drugs like lithium, valproate or other antipsychotics


Adjunctive treatment (with antidepressants) of depression with symptoms of anxiety


Adjunctive treatment (with antipsychotics), in patients who develop early extrapyramidal side-effects


Adjunctive treatment of painful muscle conditions35


Adjunctive treatment of spastic muscular paresis (para-/tetraplegia) caused by cerebral or spinal cord conditions such as stroke, multiple sclerosis, spinal cord injury (long-term treatment is coupled with other rehabilitative measures)36


Palliative treatment of stiff person syndrome37


Pre-/postoperative sedation, anxiolysis and/or amnesia (e.g. before endoscopic or surgical procedures)38


Treatment of overdosage with hallucinogens or CNS stimulants39


Adjunctive treatment of drug-induced seizures, resulting from exposure to sarin, VX, soman (or other organophosphate poisons; See CANA), lindane, chloroquine, physostigmine, or pyrethroids40


Emergency treatment of eclampsia, along with IV magnesium sulfate


Prophylactic treatment of oxygen toxicity during hyperbaric oxygen therapy.41
Used in the treatment for irritable bowel syndrome. 42
Used to treat pain resulting from muscle spasms caused by various spastic dystonias, including blepharospasm, spasmodic dysphonia and Meige's Syndrome.

Veterinary uses
Diazepam is used as a short term sedative and anxiolytic for cats and dogs. It is also used for short-term treatment of seizures in dogs and short-term and long-term treatment of seizures in cats. For emergent treatment of seizures, the typical dose is 0.5 mg/kg intravenously or 1-2 mg/kg per rectum of the injectable solution.43
Dosage
Dosages should be determined on an individual basis, depending upon the condition to be treated, the severity of symptoms, the body weight of the patient, and any comorbid conditions the patient may have.44
Elderly patients and those with liver disorders experience decreased metabolism of diazepam; therefore the dosage for these patients should be reduced. General guidelines for this group of patients: initial doses of 2mg to 2.5mg, 1 or 2 times daily; increase gradually as required/tolerated.45
Adult dosage recommendations

Insomnia - Up to 30mg orally, as a single dose, at bedtime.46


Anxiety/panic attacks - Dosage differs depending upon severity of symptoms. For panic attacks, diazepam is taken &quot;as needed&quot;.

Oral - 2mg to 10mg oral, 2 to 4 times daily.47
IV/IM - 2mg to 10mg. Repeat in 3 to 4 hours, if necessary.48



Pre-/postoperative sedation - If other premedications are used, they must be administered separately.49

Oral - Up to 20mg as a single dose.50
IV/IM - 2mg to 10mg, repeated at intervals of at least 5 to 10 minutes, until adequate sedation and/or anxiolysis is achieved.51



Status epilepticus

Oral - 2mg to 10mg, 2 to 4 times daily.52
IV/IM - 5mg to 10mg. May be repeated every 5 to 10 minutes until termination of seizures. Maximum dose of 40mg to 60mg can be used; if this dose is ineffective, other anticonvulsant drug therapy should be instituted.53
Rectal solution - 10mg as a single dose. May be repeated after 5 minutes, if necessary. The oral solution can also be administered rectally.54



Painful muscle conditions or muscle spasms

Oral - Up to 15mg daily, in divided doses. In severe spasticity associated with cerebral palsy, doses may be increased gradually up to 60mg daily.55
IV/IM - 5mg to 10mg initially, then 5mg to 10mg in 3 to 4 hours, if necessary.56



Tetanus - 100 to 300&lt;U+00B5&gt;g/kg intravenously, repeated every 1 to 4 hours.57


Spastic paresis - Usually starting with 3 times daily 2mg, increasing to up to 3 times 20mg in slow increments, taking care to avoid ataxia.


Alcohol/opioid withdrawal - For symptomatic relief of agitation, tremor, delirium tremens and hallucinosis.

Oral - 10mg, 3 or 4 times during the first 24 hours. Reduce to 5mg, 3 or 4 times a day, or as needed.58
IV/IM - 10mg initially, 5mg to 10mg in 3 to 4 hours, if necessary.59



Initial treatment of mania - 30 to 40mg daily oral or rectal, rarely more.


Overdosage with hallucinogens/CNS stimulants - Normally a single intravenous dose of 10 to 20mg is sufficient.


Adjunctive treatment of depression - Usually 10 to 30mg daily oral, the greater part of the dose given at bedtime. The doses should be decreased and the medication stopped as soon as the clinical situation allows.


Adjunctive treatment of extrapyramidal side-effects - Depends on the individual. Effective dose(s) unknown. Do not administer for more than 4 weeks.60


Cardioversion - To relieve anxiety/tension and to reduce recall of procedure. 5mg to 15mg IV, 5 to 10 minutes prior to the procedure.61


Prophylactic treatment of oxygen toxicity during hyperbaric therapy - 5mg to 10mg.62

Pediatric dosage recommendations

Patients over 6 months of age:

Initiate therapy with the lowest effective dose.63
Oral: Initial dose of 40 to 200&lt;U+00B5&gt;g/kg of bodyweight. Can be repeated as tolerated, up to 4 times daily.64
Rectal suppository: 40 to 200&lt;U+00B5&gt;g/kg of bodyweight, which can be repeated as tolerated up to 4 times daily.65

Sedation or muscle relaxation66

IV/IM - 200&lt;U+00B5&gt;g/kg of bodyweight.

Status epilepticus67

IV/IM - 200 to 300&lt;U+00B5&gt;g/kg of bodyweight. May be repeated after 5 to 10 minutes, if required.
Rectal solution - 5mg (for patients 1 to 3 years of age); repeat after 5 to 10 minutes, if necessary.

Tetanus68

Patients 30 days to 5 years of age - 1mg to 2mg IV/IM, slowly; repeat every 3 to 4 hours, as necessary.
Patients 5 years of age or older - 5mg to 10mg IV/IM, slowly; repeat every 3 to 4 hours, as necessary.

Convulsive disorders69

Patients 30 days to 5 years of age - 0.2mg to 0.5mg IV/IM, slowly, every 2 to 5 minutes. Maximum dose of 5mg.
Patients 5 years of age or older - 1mg IV/IM, slowly, every 2 to 5 minutes. Maximum of dose of 10mg. Repeat in 2 to 4 hours, if necessary.


Patients under 6 months of age:

Diazepam should not be given to children under 6 months of age or younger.70



Availability
Diazepam is supplied in the following forms:

For oral administration:

Tablets - 2mg, 5mg, 10mg71. Generic versions available.
Capsules, time-release - 15mg (marketed by Roche as Valrelease&lt;U+00AE&gt;)72
Liquid solution - 1mg/ml in 500ml containers and unit-dose (5mg &amp; 10mg); 5mg/ml in 30 ml dropper bottle (marketed by Roxane as Diazepam Intensol&lt;U+00AE&gt;)73



For parenteral administration:

Solution for IV/IM injection - 5mg/ml. 2ml ampoules and syringes; 1ml, 2ml, 10ml vials; 2 ml Tel-E-Ject; also contains 40% propylene glycol, 10% ethyl alcohol, 5% sodium benzoate and benzoic acid as buffers, and 1.5% benzyl alcohol as a preservative.7475



For rectal administration:

Solution76
Suppositories - 5mg and 10mg7778

For inhalation administration:This method uses heating diazepam to form a vapor later producing an aerosol. This allows the drug to be passed through an inhalation route during an inhalation therapy.Provided in doses 2mg-20mg either in a single inhalation or multiple small inhalations 79

Side effects
Diazepam has a range of side effects which are common to most benzodiazepines. Most common side effects include:

Somnolence
Suppression of REM sleep or dreaming
Impaired motor function

Impaired coordination
Impaired balance
Dizziness

Depression
Anterograde amnesia (especially pronounced in higher doses)
Reflex tachycardia 80

Rare paradoxical side effects can include: nervousness, irritability, insomnia, muscle cramps, and in extreme cases, rage, and violence.818283 If these side effects are present, diazepam treatment should be immediately terminated.
Up to 30% of individuals treated on a long-term basis develop a form of dependence known as &quot;low-dose-dependence.&quot; These patients do not develop a tolerance, and do not need increasingly large doses to experience the euphoric side effects of the drug.
Diazepam may impair the ability to drive vehicles or operate machinery. The impairment is worsened by consumption of alcohol, because both act as central nervous system depressants.84
During the course of therapy, tolerance to the sedative effects usually develops, but not to the anxiolytic and myorelaxant effects.85
Patients with severe attacks of apnea during sleep may suffer respiratory depression (hypoventilation) leading to respiratory arrest and death.
Organic changes such as leukopenia86 and liver-damage of the cholostatic type with or without jaundice (icterus) have been observed in a few cases.
Interactions
If diazepam is to be administered concomitantly with other drugs, attention should be paid to the possible pharmacological interactions. Particular care should be taken with drugs that enhance the effects of diazepam, such as barbiturates, phenothiazines, narcotics and antidepressants.87
Diazepam does not increase or decrease hepatic enzyme activity, and does not alter the metabolism of other compounds. There is no evidence that would suggest diazepam alters its own metabolism with chronic administration.88
Agents which have an effect on hepatic cytochrome P450 pathways or conjugation can alter the rate of diazepam metabolism. These interactions would be expected to be most significant with long-term diazepam therapy, and their clinical significance is variable.89

Diazepam increases the central depressive effects of alcohol, other hypnotics/sedatives (e.g. barbiturates), narcotics, and other muscle relaxants. The euphoriant effects of opioids may be increased, leading to increased risk of psychological dependence.9091
Cimetidine, omeprazole, ketoconazole, itraconazole, disulfiram, fluvoxamine, isoniazid, erythromycin, probenecid, propranolol, imipramine, ciprofloxacin, fluoxetine and valproic acid prolong the action of diazepam by inhibiting its elimination.9293


Oral contraceptives (&quot;the pill&quot;) significantly decrease the elimination of desmethyldiazepam, a major metabolite of diazepam.94


Rifampin, phenytoin, carbamazepine and phenobarbital increase the metabolism of diazepam, thus decreasing drug levels and effects.95


Nefazodone can cause increased blood levels of benzodiazepines.96


Cisapride may enhance the absorption, and therefore the sedative activity, of diazepam.97


Small doses of theophylline may inhibit the action of diazepam.98


Diazepam may block the action of levodopa (used in the treatment of Parkinson's Disease).99


Diazepam may alter digoxin serum concentrations.100


Other drugs that may have interactions with diazepam include: Antipsychotics (e.g. chlorpromazine), MAO inhibitors, ranitidine.101


Smoking tobacco can enhance the elimination of diazepam and decrease its action.102
Foods that acidify the urine can lead to faster absorption and elimination of diazepam, reducing drug levels and activity.103
Foods that alkalinize the urine can lead to slower absorption and elimination of diazepam, increasing drug levels and activity.104
There are conflicting reports as to whether food in general has any effects on the absorption and activity of orally administered diazepam.105

Contraindications
Use of diazepam should be avoided, when possible, in individuals with the following conditions:

Ataxia
Severe hypoventilation
Acute narrow-angle glaucoma
Severe hepatic deficiencies (hepatitis and liver cirrhosis decrease elimination by a factor of 2)
Severe renal deficiencies (e.g. patients on dialysis)
Severe sleep apnea
Severe depression, particularly when accompanied by suicidal tendencies
Acute intoxication with alcohol, narcotics, or other psychoactive substances
Myasthenia gravis
Hypersensitivity or allergy to any drug in the benzodiazepine class

Special caution needed

Pediatric patients

Less than 18 years of age - Treatment usually not indicated, except treatment of epilepsy, and pre-/postoperative treatment. The smallest possible effective dose should be used for this group of patients.106
Under 6 months of age - Safety and effectiveness have not been established; diazepam should not be given to individuals in this age group.107108



Elderly and very ill patients - Possibility that apnea and/or cardiac arrest may occur. Concomitant use of other central nervous system depressants increases this risk. The smallest possible effective dose should be used for this group of patients..109110111


I.V. or I.M. injections in hypotensive individuals or those in shock should be administered carefully and vital signs should be monitored.112

Patients at a high risk for abuse and dependence
Diazepam can lead to physiological tolerance, and psychological and/or physical dependence. At a particularly high risk for diazepam misuse, abuse, and dependence are:

Patients with a history of alcohol or drug abuse or dependence113114
Emotionally unstable patients
Patients with severe personality disorders, such as Borderline Personality Disorder115
Patients with chronic pain or other physical disorders

Patients from the aforementioned groups should be monitored very closely during therapy for signs of abuse and development of dependence. Discontinue therapy if any of these signs are noted. Long-term therapy in these patients is not recommended.116117 The American Society of Addiction Medicine has policy indicating that patients with addictive disease should not be prescribed benzodiazepines such as diazepam.
Overdose
An individual who has consumed too much diazepam will display one or more of the following symptoms118119:

Somnolence/difficulty staying awake
Mental confusion
Hypotension
Impaired motor functions

Impaired reflexes
Impaired coordination
Impaired balance
Dizziness

Coma

Although not usually fatal when taken alone, a diazepam overdose is considered a medical emergency and generally requires the immediate attention of medical personnel. The antidote for an overdose of diazepam (or any other benzodiazepine) is flumazenil (Anexate&lt;U+00AE&gt;). This drug is only used in cases with severe respiratory depression or cardiovascular complications. Because flumazenil is a short-acting drug and the effects of diazepam can last for days, several doses of flumazenil may be necessary. Artificial respiration and stabilization of cardiovascular functions may also be necessary. Although not routinely indicated, activated charcoal can be used for decontamination of the stomach following a diazepam overdose. Emesis is contraindicated. Dialysis is minimally effective. Hypotension may be treated with levarterenol or metaraminol.120121122123
The oral LD50 (lethal dose in 50% of the population) of diazepam is 720mg/kg in mice and 1240mg/kg in rats.124 D. J. Greenblatt and colleagues reported in 1978 on two patients who had taken 2000 and 500 mg of diazepam, respectively, went into moderately deep comas, and were discharged within 48 hours without having experienced important complications in spite of having high concentrations of diazepam and its metabolites—desmethyldiazepam, oxazepam, and temazepam—according to samples taken in the hospital and as follow-up.125
Overdoses of diazepam with alcohol and/or other depressants may be fatal.126
Recreational use
Generally, diazepam is not used as a recreational drug as frequently as alprazolam or flunitrazepam.
Diazepam is often found as an adulterant in heroin.127 This may be because diazepam greatly amplifies the effects of opioids.
Sometimes diazepam is used by stimulant abusers to 'come down' and sleep and to help control the urge to binge128 and also by users of LSD and other hallucinogens to help ease their trip without unpleasant after-effects.
Popular culture references

John Spencer's character of Leo McGarry in TV's &quot;THE WEST WING&quot; was a recovering Valium addict
The Fall's &quot;Roche Rumble&quot;
Lou Reed's &quot;Walk on the Wild Side&quot;
The Rolling Stones' &quot;Mother's Little Helper&quot;
Metal Gear Solid's &quot;Diazepam&quot;
Prince Valium from the movie Spaceballs
NOFX released an album in 2000 entitled Pump Up the Valuum
Bad Religion's &quot;21st Century Digital Boy&quot;
Queens of the Stone Age's song Feel Good Hit of the Summer
AC/DC's song Shoot to Thrill
Machine Gun Fellatio's song &quot;Just B'coz&quot;
The song &quot;Sleep the Clock Around&quot; by Belle &amp; Sebastian
Death in Vegas' &quot;Scorpio Rising&quot;
The Verve Pipe's &quot;The Freshmen&quot;
Franz Ferdinand &quot;Outsiders&quot;
Sublime &quot;Don't Push&quot; '...if rhymes we valium, I'd be comfortably numb...'
Stroke 9's &quot;Vacuum Bag&quot;
Half Man Half Biscuit &quot;He who Would Valium Take&quot;
Suede 'Sleeping Pills' - &quot;Gone gone to valium, can you get me some?&quot;
In the movie Beetlejuice, Lydia's mother is said to be sleeping with aid of &quot;Prince Valium.&quot;

Legal status
Internationally, diazepam is a Schedule IV drug under the Convention on Psychotropic Substances.129
Physical properties
Diazepam occurs as solid white or yellow crystals and has a melting point of 131.5 to 134.5&lt;U+00B0&gt;C. It is odorless, and has a slightly bitter taste. The British Pharmacopoeia lists diazepam as being very slightly soluble in water, soluble in alcohol and freely soluble in chloroform. The United States Pharmacopoeia lists diazepam as soluble 1 in 16 of ethyl alcohol, 1 in 2 of chloroform, 1 in 39 of ether, and practically insoluble in water. The pH of diazepam is neutral (i.e. 7). Diazepam has a shelf-life of 5 years for oral tablets and 3 years for IV/IM solution.130
Diazepam should be stored at room temperature (15&lt;U+00B0&gt;-30&lt;U+00B0&gt;C). The solution for parenteral injection should be protected from light and kept from freezing. The oral forms should be stored in air-tight containers and protected from light.131
Diazepam can absorb into plastic, and therefore diazepam solution is not stored in plastic bottles or syringes. It can absorb into plastic bags and tubing used for intervenous infusions. Absorption appears to be dependent on several factors such as temperature, concentration, flow rates and tube length. Diazepam should not be administered if a precipitate has formed and will not dissolve.132
External links

Roche Pharmaceuticals (US) - Valium Product Information


References

Fachinformationen (German) for Valium, provided by Roche Pharmaceuticals
Bandelow, Borwin et al. Handbuch der Arzneimitteltherapie, Bd.1, Psychopharmaka, 2nd edition. Enke, 2004. ISBN 3-13-113041-5.
Benkert, Otto et al. Kompendium der Psychiatrischen Pharmakotherapie, 5th edition. Springer, 2003. ISBN 3-540-21893-9.

Footnotes






bg:&lt;U+0414&gt;&lt;U+0438&gt;&lt;U+0430&gt;&lt;U+0437&gt;&lt;U+0435&gt;&lt;U+043F&gt;&lt;U+0430&gt;&lt;U+043C&gt; da:Diazepam de:Diazepam es:Diazepam he:&lt;U+05D3&gt;&lt;U+05D9&gt;&lt;U+05D0&gt;&lt;U+05D6&gt;&lt;U+05E4&gt;&lt;U+05D0&gt;&lt;U+05DD&gt; la:Diazepamum nl:Diazepam ja:&lt;U+30B8&gt;&lt;U+30A2&gt;&lt;U+30BC&gt;&lt;U+30D1&gt;&lt;U+30E0&gt; no:Diazepam pl:Diazepam pt:Diazepam ru:&lt;U+0414&gt;&lt;U+0438&gt;&lt;U+0430&gt;&lt;U+0437&gt;&lt;U+0435&gt;&lt;U+043F&gt;&lt;U+0430&gt;&lt;U+043C&gt; fi:Diatsepaami sv:Diazepam zh:&lt;U+5730&gt;&lt;U+897F&gt;&lt;U+6CEE&gt;
Category:Benzodiazepines Category:Hoffmann-La Roche Category:Hypnotics



↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩

↩

↩
↩
↩

↩
↩
↩
↩
↩

↩













↩






↩
Neurological Encyclopedia. http://www.answers.com/diazepam↩
↩
















↩













↩


↩

Pharmaceutical Patents. http://www.pharmcast.com/Patents100/Yr2004/Oct2004/101904/6805853_Diazepam101904.htm↩

↩
↩
↩

↩
↩



↩
↩





↩
↩












↩


↩
↩



↩





↩

↩
↩
↩
↩
↩



