


Devdas is a 2002 Indian romantic drama film directed by Sanjay Leela Bhansali and based on the 1917 Sharat Chandra Chattopadhyay novella Devdas. This is the third Hindi version and the first film version of the story in Hindi done in colour.12 The film follows Devdas (Shahrukh Khan), a wealthy law graduate, who returns from his studies in London to marry his childhood sweetheart, Paro (Aishwarya Rai). However, the rejection of this marriage by his own family sparks his descent into alcohol, ultimately leading to his emotional deterioration.
Devdas was declared a hit in India by Box Office India and won the Filmfare Award for Best Film. The film also won five National Awards and a further nine Filmfare Awards, tied with Dilwale Dulhania Le Jayenge with the most Filmfare Awards any film had won at the time (later beaten in 2005 by Bhansali's Black). It was received well by western audiences alike and was nominated for the BAFTA Award for Best Foreign Language Film and was also India's submission for the Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film. It was ranked #74 in Empire magazines &quot;The 100 Best Films Of World Cinema&quot; in 2010.3 ''Time Magazine '' named Devdas as the best movie of 2002 among all the movies released around the world in 2002.4 The film was recently included in Time Magazine's top 10 movies of the millennium worldwide.5
The acting was seen by many as the primary factor for the film's success, with Shahrukh Khan, Aishwarya Rai and Madhuri Dixit all winning Filmfare Awards for their performances. The film's success was also attributed to the dance performances, with Dixit's &quot;Maar Daala&quot; considered one of the most iconic of her career and the song &quot;Dola Re Dola&quot; becoming a hit due to the unique dance duet between Aishwarya Rai and Madhuri Dixit, two of the leading actresses of the epoch. At the time of its release, Devdas was the most expensive Bollywood film ever produced, with a reported budget of Rs 500 million.6
Plot
Sir Narayan Mukherjee (Vijay Crishna), a zamindar, and his wife Kaushalya (Smita Jaykar) have heard that their younger son, Devdas (Shahrukh Khan), is coming home from a law school in England to their mansion in Tal Sonapur, Bengal after an absence of ten years. When Kaushalya tells her neighbor Sumitra about Devdas' impending return, Sumitra is as overjoyed as Devdas' own mother, and with tears in her eyes she reminisces with Kaushalya about Devdas' and her daughter's deep childhood friendship. She describes how when Devdas was sent off to England at the age of ten, her daughter Paro had chased his carriage weeping, trying to return to him 3 rupees that she owed. The young girl Paro had lit an oil lamp for Devdas under the belief that by doing so he will return sooner. She tends to this lamp throughout her childhood in honor of her dear friend, never allowing it to extinguish.
On the day of his return, Kaushalya insists that everyone in the family should close their eyes so that she will be the first person to see her son. Her plan backfires, however, when instead of coming straight home, Devdas goes to see &quot;Paro&quot; Parvati Chakraborty (Aishwarya Rai), his childhood sweetheart, first. This incident makes Kaushalya jealous and at first she refuses to receive her son when he arrives, but he cajoles her and they joyfully reunite. In the ensuing weeks it becomes clear that the years apart have turned Devdas' and Paro's friendship into love. It seems to everyone, including Paro's mother Sumitra (Kirron Kher), that Devdas and Paro will get married, but Devdas's scheming sister-in-law Kumud (Ananya Khare) reminds Kaushalya of Paro's maternal lineage, which consists of nautch girls and nautanki performers. This is considered inappropriate for an alliance with the Mukherjee family. When Sumitra announces her desire for Devdas and Paro to marry, Kaushalya rejects and humiliates her in public saying that she was from a far lower class in society than themselves. Devastated, Sumitra vows to ensure that Paro will get an even better marriage and assures Kaushalya that she will find her daughter a husband richer than the Mukherjee family within a period of seven days. She soon arranges for Paro to marry Thakur Bhuvan Chaudhry (Vijayendra Ghatge), a forty-year-old widowed aristocrat with three grown children.
Meanwhile, Devdas' harsh and ambitious father also rejects Paro and tells Devdas that both Paro and her mother belong in a brothel. Devdas leaves his parents' house and takes refuge at a brothel with his college friend Chunnibabu (Jackie Shroff). He leaves a letter for Paro, falsely stating that love had never existed between them. At the brothel, Devdas meets a good-hearted tawaif (courtesan) named Chandramukhi (Madhuri Dixit), who falls in love with him. Soon, Devdas realizes his mistake in abandoning Paro. He returns to Paro at the time of her wedding to Bhuvan Chaudhry and asks her to elope with him. Paro refuses, reminding him of the way he had discarded her so easily. Grieved, Dev leads Paro to her bridal procession and Paro, still holding the lamp, sobs as she is carried away.
Paro learns from her new aristocrat husband that he has married her only to be mother to his children and lady of the estate, but that his love is only for his late first wife and he has no plan to have a true love relationship with her. Paro dutifully fulfills all her responsibilities, serving as a kind mother to the children and exemplary lady. Devdas, having lost Paro, is heartbroken. He moves to Chandramukhi's brothel permanently and becomes an alcoholic.
When Paro hears that Devdas' father is on his death bed, despite his past cruelties to Devdas and herself, she rushes to his bedside to offer comfort. He asks to see his son Devdas, but Devdas only arrives later, drunk, at his father's funeral.
Eventually, Devdas becomes so ill that the slightest dose of alcohol could kill him. He returns to the family home to heal, and discovers that his sister-in-law has stolen his mother's keys to the family safe. He confronts his sister-in-law and brother demanding they return the keys. An altercation ensues, and when his mother appears asking what is going on, the sister-in-law claims that Devdas had stolen the keys. His mother again believes the sister-in-law and sides against Devdas. Without denouncing the true culprits, Devdas leaves, banished.
News of Dev's alcoholism reaches Paro, who arrives at Chandramukhi's brothel and angrily accuses her of manipulating Devdas into drinking. She soon realizes, however, that Chandramukhi deeply cares for Devdas. Chandramukhi urges Paro to convince Devdas to stop drinking; Paro attempts to persuade him, but Devdas remains stubborn. He promises Paro that before he dies, he will come to her doorstep one last time.
Paro invites Chandramukhi, whom she has befriended, to a celebration of Durga Puja at her husband's home and introduces Chandramukhi to her in-laws without revealing her profession. However, Bhuvan's ill-natured son-in-law Kalibabu (Milind Gunaji), a frequent visitor to Chandramukhi's brothel who made inappropriate advances towards Paro, reveals Chandramukhi's background and humiliates her in front of Bhuvan and the guests. He also tells Bhuvan of Paro's relationship with Devdas. As a result, Bhuvan punishes Paro by permanently forbidding her from leaving the mansion.
Devdas tells Chandramukhi that he loves her but that she must let him go. He decides to travel the country; while on a train, he meets his old friend Chunnibabu, who urges him to drink in the name of friendship. Devdas drinks knowing full well it will be fatal.
On the verge of death, Devdas travels to Paro's house to honor his promise, collapsing under a tree in front of the main gate. Paro at first is only told that the man outside is an anonymous traveler. She performs prayers inside the house, and as she throws flower petals on the icon, flower petals likewise fall on Devdas outside. Paro then learns that it is Devdas outside the gates, and, screaming his name, runs through the mansion and grounds attempting to reach him. Bhuvan sees this and orders the servants to shut the gates. Devdas sees a blurred image of Paro running towards him, but the gates close just before she can escape, leaving her sobbing inside. When the gate slams shut, Devdas dies, whispering Paro's name with his last breath. At the same time, the lamp that Paro had lit for him flickers out.
Cast

Shahrukh khan as Devdas Mukherjee
Aishwarya Rai Bachchan as Parvati &quot;Paro&quot; Chakraborty
Madhuri Dixit Nene as Chandramukhi
Jackie Shroff as Chunnilal (&quot;Chunnibabu&quot;)
Smita Jaykar as Kaushalya Mukherjee
Manoj Joshi as Dwijdas Mukherjee
Ananya Khare as Kumud Mukherjee
Ava Mukherji as Dev's Badi-ma
Kirron Kher as Sumitra Chakraborty
Sunil Rege as Neelkanth Chakraborty
Vijay Crishna as Sir Narayan Mukherjee
Tiku Talsania as Dharamdas
Jaya Bhattacharya as Manorama
Disha Vakani as Sakhi
Milind Gunaji as Kalibabu
Dina Pathak as Bhuvan's mother
Vijayendra Ghatge as Bhuvan Chaudhry
Amardeep Jha as Kalibabu's mother
Radhika Singh as Yashomati
Apara Mehta as Badi Aapa
Muni Jha as Kaka

Location and sets
The major part of the movie was filmed at Dharavi, Mumbai, recreating the early 20th century Calcutta.7 Chandramukhi's kotha was constructed next to an artificial lake, to make it look like a set in Benaras on the Ganges.8 A temple city surrounded the set, for which inspiration was taken from the Dilwara Temples in Rajasthan.9 For the creation of Paro's room in a haveli 12,20,00,008 pieces of stained glass were used.10 Additionally, there were a few accidents on set during the making, resulting in the death of 2 people.11
Soundtrack


The film soundtrack was predominately composed by Ismail Darbar while lyrics are penned by Nusrat Badr, Prakash Kapadi and Pandit Birju Maharajand. It features playback singers Shreya Ghoshal (as Parvati), Kavita Krishnamurthy (as Chandramukhi), and Udit Narayan (as Devdas). Shreya Ghoshal made her Bollywood debut through this film. She caught the attention of Ismail Darbar when she participated in Sa Re Ga Ma Pa competition. She was also able to impress Bhansali when she sang bhajan of Lata Mangeshkar.12 She sang five songs in the album, which won her much critical acclaim and several accolades.13
Aniket Joshi of Planet Bollywood gave 9 stars stating, &quot;Rarely have we an album where ALL the songs are perfectly sung, Devdas is such an album.&quot;14



Track #
Song
Singer (s)
Composition/Lyrics
Length




1
&quot;Silsila Ye Chaahat Ka&quot;
Shreya Ghoshal
Ismail Darbar &amp; Nusrat Badr
05:26


2
&quot;Maar Dala&quot;
Kavita Krishnamurthy &amp; K.K.
Prakash Kapadia &amp; Nusrat Badr
04:39


3
&quot;Bairi Piya&quot;
Udit Narayan &amp; Shreya Ghoshal
Ismail Darbar &amp; Nusrat Badr
05:22


4
&quot;Kaahe Chhed Mohe&quot;
Pt. Birju Maharaj, Kavita Krishnamurthy &amp; Madhuri Dixit
Ismail Darbar &amp; Nusrat Badr
05:22


5
&quot;Chalak Chalak&quot;
Udit Narayan, Vinod Rathod &amp; Shreya Ghoshal
Ismail Darbar &amp; Nusrat Badr
05:12


6
&quot;Hamesha Tumko Chaha&quot;
Kavita Krishnamurthy &amp; Udit Narayan
Ismail Darbar &amp; Nusrat Badr
06:02


7
&quot;Woh Chand Jaisi Ladki&quot;
Udit Narayan
Ismail Darbar &amp; Nusrat Badr
04:32


8
&quot;Morey Piya&quot;
Jaspinder Narula &amp; Shreya Ghoshal
Sameer
05:40


9
&quot;Dev's Last Journey - The Theme&quot;
Rashmi Sharma, Supriya Raghav Chatterjee
Ismail Darbar &amp; Nusrat Badr - Music: Monty
04:09


10
&quot;Dola Re Dola&quot;
Kavita Krishnamurthy, Shreya Ghoshal &amp; K.K..
Ismail Darbar &amp; Nusrat Badr
06:36



Awards

Devdas was India's entry for Best Foreign Language Film at the Oscars in 2003.
The film was also screened at the 2002 Cannes Film Festival,15


Filmfare Awards


Devdas won ten awards at the 2002 Filmfare Awards, and was the fourth film to win the four major awards (Best Movie, Best Director, Best Actor and Best Actress).

Best Film - Bharat Shah
Best Actor - Shahrukh Khan
Best Actress - Aishwarya Rai
Best Director - Sanjay Leela Bhansali
Best Supporting Actress - Madhuri Dixit
Best Female Playback - Kavita Krishnamurthy &amp; Shreya Ghosal for &quot;Dola Re Dola&quot;
Best Cinematographer - Binod Pradhan
Best Art Direction - Nitin Chandrakant Desai
Best Choreography - Saroj Khan
Best Scene of the Year - Confrontation scene between Parvati and Chandramukhi.


National Film Awards


Devdas won five awards at the 2002 national awards:

National Film Award for Best Popular Film Providing Wholesome Entertainment
National Film Award for Best Art Direction- Nitin Chandrakant Desai
National Film Award for Best Female Playback Singer - Shreya Ghoshal
National Film Award for Best Choreography - Saroj Khan
National Film Award for Best Costume Design - Neeta Lulla, Abu Jani, Sandeep Khosla and Reza Shariffi


Star Screen Awards


Devdas won five awards at the 2002 Star Screen Awards:

Best Actor - Shahrukh Khan (shared with Ajay Devgan)
Best Actress - Aishwarya Rai
Best Supporting Actress - Madhuri Dixit
Star Screen Award Jodi No. 1 - Aishwarya Rai &amp; Shahrukh Khan
Star Screen Award Best Male Playback - Udit Narayan for &quot;Woh Chand Jaisi Ladki&quot;


IIFA Awards


Devdas won six awards at the 2003 IIFA Awards:

Best Movie - Devdas - Bharat Shah
IIFA Best Director Award - Sanjay Leela Bhansali
Best Actor In Leading Role Devdas - Shahrukh Khan
Best Actress In Leading Role Devdas - Aishwarya Rai
Best Actress in a Supporting Role Devdas - Kirron Kher
IIFA Best Female Playback Award Devdas - Shreya Ghosal, Kavita Krishnamurthy for Dola Re Dola


MTV Asia Awards


Devdas won the 2003 Asian Film Award.161718

British Academy Film Awards


Devdas was nominated for the BAFTA Award for Best Foreign Language Film, 2003.
Box office
Devdas grossed  and was declared an all time blockbuster at the Indian box office by Box Office India.19 The film was the highest grossing film of 2002.20 It grossed  worldwide.21 When adjusted for inflation its total gross worldwide is . 22 It opened strongly at multiplexes in Mumbai with a whopping 100% occupancy at theatres.
References

External links


India Times: Official Site of Devdas
The Tribune: Yeh Kaisa Devdas?
Planet Bollywood: Music Review - Devdas








Category:2002 films Category:Indian films Category:Indian epic films Category:Hindi-language films Category:Devdas films Category:Films set in the 1900s Category:Films set in Kolkata Category:Filmfare Best Movie Award winners Category:Films directed by Sanjay Leela Bhansali Category:2000s romantic drama films Category:Films about women in India Category:Films based on Indian novels




↩
↩
↩
↩
The unbearable opulence of Devdas, Frontline, vol 19, issue 17, August 2002.↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KpVd97fucAs↩
↩
↩

↩
 ↩
1 ↩
2 ↩
http://www.boxofficeindia.com/showProd.php?itemCat=208&amp;catName=MjAwMg==↩
↩
Boxofficeindia.com↩
Boxofficeindia.com↩


