

 BAE Systems Inc. (formerly BAE Systems North America) is a major subsidiary of the UK-based defence and aerospace company BAE Systems plc. It operates as a semi-autonomous business unit within BAE Systems controlled at a local level by American management.
BAE Systems' 2003 Annual Report states that then BAE Systems North America had an order book of &lt;U+00A3&gt;2.4 billion, sales of &lt;U+00A3&gt;2.7 billion and a profit of &lt;U+00A3&gt;230 million. In context; group figures were &lt;U+00A3&gt;46 billion, &lt;U+00A3&gt;12.6 billion &lt;U+00A3&gt;980 million respectively.
History
The company was created on November 30 1999. On this date Marconi Electronic Systems (MES) and British Aerospace (BAe) merged to form BAE Systems. Their respective subsidiaries in the USA, Marconi North America and British Aerospace North America, were similarly merged to form BAE Systems North America.
In the company's 2003 Annual Report the Chairman sums up BAE Systems' strategy since the merger; &quot;In recent years BAE Systems has undergone a radical transformation from a UK-based aircraft manufacturer to a broadly-based systems business. Through this transformation the company has achieved a more balanced portfolio and geographic spread.&quot;
BAE Systems North America was renamed BAE Systems Inc. in 2005 following a major reorganisation of BAE Systems plc as a result of the Eurosystems (Selex) and UDI transactions.
Expansion
In 1999 by far the most significant part of the newly created BAE Systems North America was Tracor, which was acquired by Marconi North America in 1998. Since 1999 almost all of BAE Systems' growth has been concentrated in the US. BAE Systems North America has grown to the point where its sales to the (American) Department of Defense have surpassed those of its parent to the (British) Ministry of Defence. BAE Systems is now by far the largest foreign investor in the US defence industry.
With the political and military ties that exist between the US and the UK, BAE Systems has faced little opposition to acquisitions of important US defence contractors. The biggest test to date was the purchase of United Defense Industries (UDI), completed in 2005.
In April 2000 BAE purchased Lockheed Martin Control Systems (LMCS), a manufacturer of electronic controls for aircraft, space vehicles and the transportation industry for $510 million USD. LMCS was renamed BAE Systems Platform Solutions. In November 2000 BAE Systems purchased Lockheed Martin Aerospace Electronic Systems, a defence systems company which encompassed Sanders, Fairchild Systems and Lockheed Martin Space Electronics &amp; Communications. Following an internal reorganisation the division became BAE Systems Electronics &amp; Integrated Solutions (E&amp;IS).
In December 2002 BAE Systems completed its acquisition of Condor Pacific, Inc. for $58.5 million. Condor Pacific was a manufacturer of sensors and guidance systems for the aerospace industry. 1
In 2003 BAE Systems acquired Advanced Power Technologies, Inc (APTI), a data exploitation company and provider of communications and networking solutions, for $27 million. APTI was merged into E&amp;IS. In March 2003 BAE Systems acquired MEVATEC, a provider of &quot;professional technical services&quot;, which was renamed BAE Systems Analytical &amp; Ordnance Solutions.
In 2004 BAE Systems purchased STI Government Systems which provides &quot;photonics, information technologies, system integration ...and a variety of services to other government agencies in areas such as pollution mapping and search and rescue.&quot; 2STI is now part of the CNIR division of BAE Systems E&amp;IS. In August 2004 BAE Systems acquired Boeing Commercial Electronics (now part of the Platform Solutions unit of BAE Systems E&amp;IS).

2004 - DigitalNet Holdings Inc (now BAE Systems Information Technology)
2004 - ALPHATECH (now BAE Systems Advanced Information Technologies)
2005 - United Defense Industries (now BAE Systems Land and Armaments)
2007 - Armor Holdings for $4.1 billion.

Corporate governance
Members of the board of directors of BAE Systems North America as of 16 April 2007 are:
Marshall Banker, Sheila Cheston, Bob Fitch, Curt Gray, Bob Hastings, Walt Havenstein * **, Mike Heffron, Galen Ho, Linda Hudson, Bob Murphy, Mike Rouse **, Allison Wood **
President * Member of Executive Committee **
Product range

Data links/communications
Combat identification (IFF)
Electronic warfare and missile countermeasures
Reconnaissance and surveillance systems
Avionics
Flight controls and engine controls
Munitions
IT

Organisation

BAE Systems Customer Solutions

BAE Systems Information Technology
BAE Systems Ship Repair
BAE Systems Technology Solutions and Services

BAE Systems Analytical &amp; Ordnance Solutions


BAE Systems Land and Armaments

BAE Systems Armament Systems Division
BAE Systems Ground Systems Division
BAE Systems Steel Products Division
BAE Systems Bofors
BAE Systems Land Systems

BAE Systems Land Systems Weapons &amp; Vehicles
BAE Systems Land Systems Hagglunds
BAE Systems Land Systems South Africa
Land Systems Munitions &amp; Ordnance


BAE Systems Electronics and Integrated Solutions

Electronic Warfare
Network Systems
Platform Solutions
Sensor Systems


References




www.na.baesystems.com


Category:BAE Systems Category:Defense companies of the United States



↩
↩


