
The National Physicians Alliance (NPA) is a national, multi-specialty medical organization founded in 2005. The organization's mission statement reads: &quot;The National Physicians Alliance creates research and education programs that promote health and foster active engagement of physicians with their communities to achieve high quality, affordable health care for all. The NPA offers a professional home to physicians across medical specialties who share a commitment to professional integrity and health justice.&quot;
The NPA was founded by former leaders of the American Medical Student Association as an alternative to traditional trade associations that primarily serve the economic interests of physicians rather than advocating first and foremost on behalf of patients and public health. In order to avoid conflicts of interest, the NPA does not accept funding from pharmaceutical or medical device companies.
NPA's guiding principles focus on health and wellness, avoiding conflicts of interest that might affect medical decisions,1 collaborative and team-based care, and addressing social determinants of health.
Currently, there are four issues that are claimed to be the focus of NPA's work

Integrity and Trust in Medicine
Equitable, Affordable Health Care for All
Patient Safety and Systems Improvement
Civic Engagement

Several of NPA's campaigns also focus on gun violence prevention. NPA also conceived and piloted the &quot;Choosing Wisely&quot; concept with a grant from the ABIM Foundation and the support of Consumer Reports. The concept encourages patients to choose care that is supported by evidence, not duplicative of other tests or procedures already received, free from harm, and truly necessary.2 The &quot;Choosing Wisely&quot; Campaign won a &quot;Foremother Award&quot; from the National Research Center for Women and Families.3 Their &quot;Good Stewardship&quot; campaign on eliminating the top 5 unnecessary medical treatments led to an articles in the Journal of the American Medical Association.45
A 501c(3) organization based in Washington DC, the NPA has a membership of approximately 20,000 physicians. Members must have graduated with an M.D. or D.O. degree from a professional school accredited by the LCME or the AOA's COCA; or hold a license to practice medicine within the United States.
The current president of the NPA is Cheryl Bettigole, MD, MPH, a family physician. The Executive Director is Jean Silver-Isenstadt, MD, PhD. Dr. Silver-Isenstadt served on the Pew Charitable Trusts &quot;Expert Task Force on Conflicts of Interest in Medicine.&quot;6 The current NPA Senior Policy Advisor is Valerie Arkoosh, who appeared on All In with Chris Hayes to talk about the Affordable Care Act.7
See also

Health care reform
Affordable Care Act
List of healthcare reform advocacy groups in the United States
Physicians for a National Health Program
Single-payer health care
United States National Health Care Act
Universal health care

References

External links

National Physicians Alliance (NPA) official site
National Physicians Alliance Facebook page
National Physicians Alliance Twitter page

Category:Medical associations based in the United States Category:Healthcare reform advocacy groups in the United States



↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩


