 The Hue Vesak shootings refer to the deaths of eight unarmed Buddhist civilians on May 8, 1963 in the city of Hu&lt;U+1EBF&gt; in South Vietnam at the hands of the army and security forces of the Catholic government of Ngo Dinh Diem. The army and police had opened fired with guns and launched grenades into a crowd of Buddhists who had been protesting against a government ban on the flying of the Buddhist flag on the day of Vesak, which commemorates the birth of Gautama Buddha. Diem's denial of government responsibility in the incident, blaming the Vietcong, led to growing discontent among the Buddhist majority. It stoked the start of a protest movement by Buddhists against the religious discrimination of the Catholic-dominated Diem regime, known as the Buddhist crisis, and widespread large scale civil disobedience among South Vietnamese. After six months of tension, generals from the Army of the Republic of Vietnam conducted a coup on November 1 amid growing opposition to the regime, which saw the removal and assassination of Diem.
Prelude
In a country where surveys of the religious composition estimated the Buddhist majority to be between 70 and 90 percent,1234567 President Ngo Dinh Diem's policies generated claims of religious bias. As a member of the Catholic Vietnamese minority, he was widely regarded by historians as having pursued pro-Catholic policies that antagonized many Buddhists. Specifically, the government was regarded as being biased towards Catholics in public service and military promotions, as well as the allocation of land, business favors and tax concessions.8 Di&lt;U+1EC7&gt;m also once told a high-ranking officer, forgetting that he was a Buddhist, &quot;Put your Catholic officers in sensitive places. They can be trusted.&quot; Many officers in the Army of the Republic of Vietnam converted to Catholicism in the belief that their military prospects depended on it.9 Additionally, the distribution of firearms to village self-defense militias intended to repel Vietcong guerrillas saw weapons only given to Catholics, with Buddhists in the army being denied promotion if they refused to convert to Catholicism.10 Some Catholic priests ran their own private armies,11 and in some areas forced conversions, looting, shelling and demolition of pagodas occurred.12 Some Buddhist villages converted en masse in order to receive aid or avoid being forcibly resettled by Di&lt;U+1EC7&gt;m's regime.13 The Catholic Church was the largest landowner in the country, and the &quot;private&quot; status that was imposed on Buddhism by the French, which required official permission to conduct public Buddhist activities, was not repealed by Di&lt;U+1EC7&gt;m.14 The land owned by the Catholic Church was exempt from land reform.15 Catholics were also de facto exempt from the corv&lt;U+00E9&gt;e labor that the government obliged all citizens to perform; U.S. aid was disproportionately distributed to Catholic majority villages. Under Di&lt;U+1EC7&gt;m, the Catholic church enjoyed special exemptions in property acquisition, and in 1959, Di&lt;U+1EC7&gt;m dedicated his country to the Virgin Mary.16 The white and gold Vatican flag was regularly flown at all major public events in South Vietnam.17  A 1958 rarely enforced law known as Decree Number 10 was invoked on May 7 to prohibit the display of religious flags. This disallowed the flying of Buddhist flags on Vesak, the birthday of Gautama Buddha. The invoking official was the deputy province chief in charge of security, a Catholic named Major Dang Sy. Dang Sy was charged with maintaining public security and was commander of the Hue garrison. The application of the law generated Buddhist indignation on the eve of the most important religious festival of the year as Catholics had a week earlier been able to display Vatican flags to celebrate the 25th anniversary of the appointment of Thuc as archbishop. The celebrations had been bankrolled by the regime of his brother Ngo Dinh Diem. This was organised through a national committee which asked the population to donate money to Thuc's jubilee. Buddhists complained that they were forced to give a month's wages to the celebration.18 Thousands of Buddhist flags had already been foistered out homes and pagodas in preparation for Vesak. As a result, the authorities tore down the Buddhist flags19. The order to enforce the law on the Buddhists was attributed to Thuc. Despite protestations from Ho Dac Khuong, the Saigon representative to the central provinces, the order was enacted upon consultation with Saigon. Villages in the central region had converted en masse to Catholicism, with priests allowed special access to government facilities and funds. The designation of Buddhism as an &quot;association&quot; prevented it from acquiring land for the construction of pagodas.20
Protest and shootings
Thousands of Buddhists defied the ban on Vesak the following day. More than 500 marched across the Perfume River and congregated at Tu Dam Pagoda before a 3000 strong demonstration in the city centre, calling for religious equality as government security officials surrounded the area with armoured personnel carriers and civil guardsmen. The signs were in both English in Vietnamese to convey the message to western bystanders. Despite the ban on religious flags, the Vatican flags hoisted on the bridge from the Catholic celebration was never taken down.21 The leading Buddhist activist monk Thich Tri Quang addressed and exhorted the crowd to rise up against Catholic discrimination against Buddhism. He called the Buddhists to congregate outside the government radio station in the evening for a rally. Tension swelled throughout the day as demonstrators chanted and displayed anti-government slogans and the crowd grew. They expected to hear a speech from the Buddhist leader Thich Tri Quang, but the speech was withdrawn from broadcast by the government censor. Armed forces were called in to disperse the discontented crowd. After two explosions shook the ground, the crowd thought that the troops had resorted to bombs. Dang Sy fired into the air and his men responded by launching grenades into the crowd as fire hoses were unleashed on the demonstrators. His troops fired directly into the crowd. In the end eight had been killed and four severely injured. Two of the dead, both children, had been crushed underneath armoured personnel carriers. Some had been mutilated and decapitated.2223
Government reaction
 Diem and his government alleged that a Vietcong had caused the incident by setting off the initial explosion, sparking a stampede. He initially refused to take any disciplinary action against the local authorities, claiming that they had acted properly. The government claimed that only percussion grenades had been used, not lethal fragmentation grenades. The force of the explosion cast doubt on whether the Vietcong would have had access to sufficiently powerful explosives. Another conspiracy theory that was spread at the time was that a CIA agent had used high powered explosives to incite sectarian tension and destablise the Diem regime. Eyewitnesses disagreed, citing amateur footage, which showed government troops firing on the crowd. An inspection by a local doctor declared that there was no evidence of the fatal injuries being inflicted by Vietcong plastic bombs. He was subsequently jailed.24 Diem refused to be swayed, and ordered the bodies buried without autopsy. Thich Tri Quang spent the nide riding through the streets of Hue with a loudspeaker, accusing the government of firing on the demonstrators. US Ambassador Frederick Nolting, known for his appeasement of Diem, attempted to spread the responsibility. He said that all parties were responsible, alleging that the demonstrators had tried to take over the radio station, the government for bringing the army, which opened fire and &quot;agitators&quot; for throwing the explosives. When the government refused to assign responsibility, Nolting called it &quot;objective, accurate and fair.&quot;2526
Buddhist reaction and protests
At 11 am on May 9, Dang Sy announced to nearly 800 youthful pro-Buddhist demonstrators that &quot;oppositionist agitators&quot; had forced troops to take severe measures in maintaining order in the face of Vietcong agitation. The youthful protestors showed their anger at such an improbable explanation by marching around the old citadel quarter of Hue, chanting anti-Catholic and anti-Diem slogans. A government organised counter-demonstration under the leadership of Diem's brother and political operator Ngo Dinh Nhu attracted almost nobody to meeting to condemn the &quot;Vietcong terrorist act.&quot; Thich Tri Quang, who had travelled throughout the country protesting against religious inequality and the flag ban, began rallying the Buddhists in Central Vietnam. He called them to attend a public mass funeral for the Hue victims scheduled for May 10. Such an emotion charged spectacle would attract thousands of spectators and place pressure on Diem's regime to grant reforms. The government placed a curfew and put all armed personnel on around the clock duty to &quot;prevent VC infiltration&quot;. A confrontation was averted when Thich Tri Quang persuaded the populace to lay down their flags and slogans and observe the nine o clock curfew. The following day, the tension increased as a corwd of around 6000 Buddhists attended Tu Dam Pagoda for the funerals and meetings. Dang Sy was present with ARVN troops and armed police keeping a close watch. Slogans and speeches calling for religious equality and anti-government sentiment were prevalent. Thich Tri Quang called on Buddhists to use unarmed struggle and follow Gandhian principles, saying &quot;Carry no weapons; be prepared to die. . . follow Gandhi's policies&quot;. After Dang Sy echoed Buddhist calls for compensation and expressed sorrow for the victims, the meeting dissolved without violence.27
Trial
After the fall of the Diem regime in a coup on Novmeber 1, 1963, a trial was held under a government lead by Nguyen Khanh against Dang Sy. Some of the accusations were that Dang Sy's men had fired on the crowd and crushed the victims with armoured cars, or that the grenades had been launched at his orders and caused the deaths. Dang Sy was put under pressure to reveal that Thuc had personally given him the order to shoot the Buddhists, but he refused to testify against Thuc, who was living in exile in Rome. He was condemned to life imprisonment and ordered to compensate the victims' families. His lawyer contended that the court had been unable to establish the nature and source of the lethal explosions. Catholic General Tran Thien Khiem, who had helped Khanh in his January 1964 coup and was Defense Minister, later claimed that Khanh had rigged the trial to gain Thich Tri Quang's support. In 1970, the Saigon based Catholic newspaper Hoa Binh ran a conspiracy theory claiming that CIA agents used a secret and new explosive to foment trouble for Diem's regime which had deteriorating relations with the United States. 28
Buddhist demands for equality

On May 10, Thich Tri Quang proclaimed a five-point &quot;manifesto of the monks&quot; that demanded freedom to fly the Buddhist flag, religious equality between Buddhists and Catholics, compensation for the victims' families, and end to arbitrary arrests and punishment for the officials responsible. The provincial chief himself agreed that the Diem should compensate the families of the dead and wounded.29
On May 13, a committee of Buddhist monks formalized their request to Diem for the five demands. Although the signatories had couched the declaration in &quot;requests&quot; they had expectations that these would be met. On May 15, a delegation of six monks and two laymen met Diem to present the document. After the meeting, the monks held a press conference at Xa Loi Pagoda, the foremost pagoda in Saigon. It was to be the first of many in which they attempted to publicise their cause to the foreign press corps.30 He agreed to meet with a Buddhist delegation, but increased tension by talking down to them. Initially Diem refused to pay compensation, believing it was a sign of weakness. Diem stated that there was no discrimination in South Vietnam and claimed that all religions had been treated equally with respect to the flag issue. In regard to the classification of Buddhism as an association under Decree 10, Diem said that it was an administrative oversight that would be fixed. It was not done during the last six months before Diem was assassinated. Diem labelled the Buddhists &quot;damn fools&quot; for demanding something that according to him, they already enjoyed. The government press release detailing the meeting itself used the expression &quot;damn fools&quot;.3132
As the demonstrations continued, US Ambassador Frederick Nolting, known for his appeasement of Diem, managed to extract concessions from Diem after long negotiations on May 18. He agreed to make a modest compensation package of USD7000 for the families of the victims as a reconciliation gesture. Diem also agreed to dismiss Xi and those in Hue responsible for the shootings. However, the publicly stated reason for this action was that the officials had failed to maintain order, rather than their killings of the protestors. Despite this, Diem maintained that his government was not responsible for the deaths, resolutely blaming the Vietcong. It was enough to satisfy Nolting, who went on his vacation. His absence allowed the remaining Americans under William Trueheart, Nolting's deputy, to scupper his appeasement policy.33 Despite this, Nolting agreed with Diem in the belief that the Buddhists were communists. Nolting also suggested that Diem appoint a commission of inquiry headed by a prominent Buddhist.34
Notes

References









vi:S&lt;U+1EF1&gt; ki&lt;U+1EC7&gt;n Ph&lt;U+1EAD&gt;t &lt;U+0110&gt;&lt;U+1EA3&gt;n, 1963
Category:1963 in Vietnam Category:Buddhism in Vietnam Category:Anti-Buddhism



The 1966 Buddhist Crisis in South Vietnam HistoryNet↩
Gettleman (1966) pp. 275&lt;U+2013&gt;76, 366.↩
Moyar (2006) pp. 215&lt;U+2013&gt;16.↩
↩
Tucker pp. 49,291,293↩
Maclear (1981) p. 63↩
↩
Tucker (2000) p. 291.↩
Gettleman (1966) pp. 280&lt;U+2013&gt;82.↩
↩
Warner, p. 210↩
Fall (1966), p. 199↩
Buttinger, p. 993↩
Karnow (1997) p. 294.↩
Buttinger p. 933.↩
Jacobs p. 91↩
↩
Hammer, pp.103-105↩
South Vietnam's Buddhist Crisis: Organization for Charity, Dissidence, and Unity - Asian Survey, Vol. 4, No. 7 (Jul., 1964), pp. 915-928↩
Hammer, pp.110-111↩
Warner, p.226↩
Jacobs, pp.142-143↩
Jones, pp.247-250↩
Hammer, pp.134-135↩
Jones, pp.250-251↩
Jacobs, pp.142-143↩
Jones, pp.251-252↩
Hammer, pp.114-116↩
Jacobs, p.143↩
Hammer, p.117↩
Jacobs, p.143↩
Jones, pp.252-253↩
Jacobs, pp.144-145↩
Jones, pp.254-255↩


