Concerned Women for America is a conservative Christian political action group active in the United States. The group was founded in 1979 by Beverly LaHaye, wife of Christian Coalition co-founder Timothy LaHaye, as a response to activities by the National Organization for Women and a 1978 Barbara Walters interview with noted feminist Betty Friedan.1 Concerned Women for America says of itself:

We are the nation's largest public policy women's organization with a rich 28-year history of helping our members across the country bring Biblical principles into all levels of public policy. We help people focus on six core issues, which we have determined need Biblical principles most and where we can have the greatest impact.2

CWA does not publish membership numbers, but external estimates range between 250,000 and 750,000, depending upon how membership is defined. As of 2006, the circulation of its free bimonthly newsletter, Family Voice, was estimated to be approximately 200,000 copies.3
Mission statement
Its mission statement is: &quot;The mission of CWA is to protect and promote Biblical values among all citizens - first through prayer, then education, and finally by influencing our society - thereby reversing the decline in moral values in our nation.&quot;
The CWA Statement of Faith is as follows:

We believe the Bible to be the verbally inspired, inerrant Word of God and the final authority on faith and practice.
We believe Jesus Christ is the divine Son of God, was born of a virgin, lived a sinless life, died a sacrificial death, rose bodily from the dead on the third day and ascended into Heaven from where He will come again to receive all believers unto Himself.
We believe all men are fallen creations of Adam's race and in need of salvation by grace through personal faith in the Lord Jesus Christ.
We believe it is our duty to serve God to the best of our ability and to pray for a moral and spiritual revival that will return this nation to the traditional values upon which it was founded.

Advocacy
Concerned Women for America's political advocacy efforts are based on its six &quot;core issues,&quot; which they see as Biblically-based and supported by scripture. These are:4

Family - &quot;CWA believes that marriage consists of one man and one woman. We seek to protect and support the Biblical design of marriage and the gift of children.&quot; CWA donated $409,000 in support of Proposition 8, which banned same-sex marriage in the state of California.
Sanctity of Human Life - &quot;CWA supports the protection of all innocent human life from conception until natural death. This includes the consequences resulting from abortion.&quot;
Education - &quot;CWA supports reform of public education by returning authority to parents.&quot;
Pornography - &quot;CWA endeavors to fight all pornography and obscenity.&quot;
Religious Liberty - &quot;CWA supports the God-given rights of individuals in the United States and other nations to pray, worship and express their beliefs without fear of discrimination or persecution.&quot;
National Sovereignty - &quot;CWA believes that neither the United Nations nor any other international organization should have authority over the United States in any area. We also believe the United States has the right and duty to protect and secure our national borders.&quot;

Concerned Women for America's major areas of political activity in recent years have consisted of opposition to LGBT political causes (especially recognition of same-sex unions), promoting anti-abortion law, supporting embryonic stem-cell research bans, and working against human trafficking.
Position on LGBT rights
Concerned Women for America opposes legal recognition of LGBT rights as civil rights, stating, &quot;Human rights flow from being, not status. Rather than acknowledging that rights stem from our status as human beings who deserve to be treated with dignity, this basis would switch rights to a particular undefined or self-defined status&quot;. 5. CWA states that many state and federal laws define marriage as a legal union between a man and a woman, and it calls all forms of civil unions or domestic partnership between same-sex individuals &quot;counterfeit marriage[s]&quot; 6 that the group believes will be used &quot;to take control and to have the force of law to legitimise their disordered, unnatural behaviors.&quot;7
Opposition to gay marriage has also led the group to oppose hate crime legislation that includes sexual orientation, referring to such laws as &quot;weapons against... people who might oppose the homosexual agenda, such as Christians preaching on the street, even Christians preaching from the pulpit around the world.&quot; Matt Barber, CWA&lt;U+2019&gt;s Director of Cultural and Social Policy, suggests that false reports of hate crimes have been used to push legislation supporting the same-sex agenda, and in 2007, he asked for a federal investigation into these allegedly false reports89
CWA asserts that homosexuality is against the Christian idea of God's wishes for sexuality,1011 describing homosexual behavior as &quot;disordered,&quot; &quot;unnatural,&quot; and &quot;immoral.&quot;1213 CWA has been a consistent opponent of the Employment Non-Discrimination Act,1415 which would prohibit discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation in employment. Recent initiatives sponsored by CWA have placed emphasis on opposing programs geared towards LGBT teenagers on the basis that such programs &quot;promote homosexuality,&quot;16 as well as opposing anti-bullying programs which explicitly mention sexual minority youth,17 stating that &quot;the radical homosexual lobby has done a masterful job of infiltrating our government schools to gain control of the minds of America&lt;U+2019&gt;s youth. Their propaganda tactics are time-tested. With liberal school officials in tow, they brazenly circumvent and abuse parental authority to use good-hearted but misguided children as pawns to further their deceptive agenda.&quot;18 CWA supports their position by saying that homosexuals do not suffer from a history of discrimination,19 that reports of bias crimes against LGBT people are typically fabricated,2021 and that such protections would violate the religious liberties of Christians.22
Position on abortion rights
Concerned Women for America opposes many of the core values of modern feminism, including parts of the Equal Rights Amendment they believe fail to comply with their value system .23 The group also opposes abortion in all cases, except to save the life of the mother. Health exemptions are considered &quot;deceptive&quot; and not supported.24
It also opposes emergency contraception, including after cases of rape,25 asserting that ECP is actually an abortifacient by redefining pregnancy to begin at conception, not implantation of the zygote.26 CWA asserts that most forms of birth control—and all forms of hormonal birth control—are actually abortifacients, triggering chemical abortions.27
Abstinence-only sex education
Concerned Women for America supports abstinence-only sex education, which it refers to as &quot;abstinence-until-marriage.&quot; Linda Schauer, the State Director of CWA for South Dakota, in a letter to Governor M. Michael Rounds, cited a study finding that one in four teenagers in South Dakota have an STD in order to promote her organization's stance on the issue. According to Schauer, the CWA's stance on sex education intends to teach children the &quot;dangers of sex outside of marriage and give them the tools to avoid promiscuity.&quot; 28 In opposition to abstinence-only programs, Mathematica Policy Research, Inc, studied children aged 9&lt;U+2013&gt;11, following up on them 5 years later to find that the abstinence programs were ineffective. In a study of 2,057 teens, the report found that the likelihood of children educated with comprehensive sex education to remain abstinent for the next 5 years was about the same as that of those who received abstinence-only education. 29 In response to this report, Valerie Mosher of CWA argued that &quot;the findings about abstinence programs are based on a flawed design&quot; because the children involved in the study were only educated in these programs from ages 9&lt;U+2013&gt;11, which she believes was too young for the importance of abstinence to have taken effect. 30
Critics  state that the strong abstinence-only stances taken up by CWA based upon Christian principles have not been more effective than those of secular democracies of Western Europe in terms of preventing unwise teenage sexual activity and sexually transmitted diseases among teenage segments of the population.31 In an article published on December 29, 2008, the Washington Post cited a report by the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, which stated that teens who make vows of abstinence are just as likely to have pre-marital intercourse as those who do not, and it also claims that the children who do make these pledges are less likely to use birth control or condoms 32.
In a Special Report broadcast on Fox News Channel on 31 December 2007, CWA President Wendy Wright made the following claim regarding proponents of comprehensive sexual education:33

&quot;In fact they want to encourage that because they benefit when kids end up having sexually transmitted diseases, unintended pregnancies and then they lead them into having abortions. So you have to look at the financial motives behind those who are promoting comprehensive sex ed.&quot;

Promotion of Christianity
Concerned Women for America supports prayer in public schools, stating that &quot;religious expression has been denied to students&quot; since the implementation of twentieth-century legislation. Laurel MacLeod, writing for the CWA in an article titled &quot;School Prayer And Religious Liberty: A Constitutional Perspective&quot;, suggests that the banning of prayer in public schools can be seen as a breach of the First Amendment 34. CWA also supports the the teaching of intelligent design in public schools, arguing that courses only teaching evolution fail to give students a well-rounded view of the universe's creation 35.
Positions on media
Concerned Women for America opposes pornography, obscenity, and media indecency,36 specifically on satellite radio,37 and satellite and cable television.38 CWA supports &quot;a la carte&quot; cable and satellite television purchasing plans, allowing individuals to purchase access to individual channels, as opposed to programming packages.39
Other advocacy
Concerned Women for America oppose human trafficking in all forms, particularly of women for sexual purposes.40
Concerned Women for America also opposes embryonic stem-cell research, describing it as &quot;deadly,&quot; and the destruction of &quot;embryonic human beings.&quot;41
On August 22, 2006 CWA announced that they &quot;strongly believe&quot; hotel porn is prosecutable, and have issued an &quot;urgent appeal&quot; to the United States Department of Justice to &quot;immediately investigate&quot; two leading in-room adult movie distributors.
In a joint effort with thirteen other groups, it released an ad which stated &quot;DOJ and FBI should immediately investigate whether 'adult' videos being sold in hotels by OnCommand and LodgeNet violate long-established Federal and State laws regarding distribution of obscene material. ... Adult hardcore pornography can tragically lead to sex crimes against women and children. ... Yet sex videos are available in millions of U.S. hotel rooms which we strongly believe are prosecutable.&quot;42
Opposition to mandating cervical cancer vaccination
CWA is heavily active in opposing mandating vaccination against HPV, the virus which can lead to cervical cancer, since Gardasil, the vaccine, was released. Instead, CWA is suggesting that because there are questions about the long term effect of the vaccine, parents, not the government should be making this decision. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has withdrawn their call for mandating the HPV vaccine, as has Merck, who recently ceased lobbying efforts in state legislatures. CWA does not object to the vaccine itself, but is objecting to any mandate. CWA does advocate abstinence before marriage as the best way to fight contracting viruses like HPV. However, it is still very possible that a woman could be abstinent until marriage and still contract this disease through the past sexual contact of her husband . It is for this reason, CWA does not object to the vaccine, but instead advocates it being made available.
Fundraising Issues
According to the California Attorney General, Concerned Women for America has an extremely low profit margin from the fundraising companies it hired. Over the course of nine years (1997-2006), CWA hired fundraisers to conduct California or nationwide operations a total of 24 times. These fundraisers generated a total of $14,719,708 in gross income, but CWA only received $975,396, or 6.6%. This is considered extremely low in fundraising circles. One company, MDS Communications Corporation carried out 16 fundraisers for CWA raising $10,063,901 but only paid CWA $140,863, or 1.4%.43
Principals

Beverly LaHaye, Founder and Chairman, wife and co-author with Tim LaHaye,44 a best-selling author
Wendy Wright, President, a frequent guest on national and international media discussing moral, social and political issues45
Lee LaHaye, Chief Financial Officer
Matt Barber, Director of Cultural and Social Policy46
Martha W. Kleder, writer and policy analyst

External links

Official website
notourkids.com, a coalition including CWA comprising family policy councils

References

de:Concerned Women for America es:Concerned Women for America
Category:Anti-pornography activists Category:Conservative organizations in the United States Category:Pro-life organizations in the United States Category:Women's political advocacy groups in the United States Category:Organizations established in 1979



Gardiner, S., &quot;Concerned Women for America: A Case Study&quot;, Feminism and Women's Studies, 28 August 2006. Online as of 19 April 2007.↩
* ↩

* ↩
Wright, W.,&quot;New Zealand Calls for International Approval of &quot;Sexual Orientation&quot; Rights&quot;, Concerned Women for America, 18 April 2005. Online as of 17 April 2007.↩
LaRue, J., Why Concerned Women for America opposes the Federal Marriage Amendment, Concerned Women for America, 18 August 2003. Online as of 16 April 2007.↩
Barber, M., as transcribed by Korra'ti, R., Today's Cultural Warfare Update, Cultural Warfare Update, 1 March 2007. Online as of 17 April 2007.↩
Barber, M. False &lt;U+2018&gt;Hate Crime&lt;U+2019&gt; Reports Fueling Calls for Federal Legislation, Concerned Women for America, 12 April 2007. Online as of 16 April 2007.↩
Barber, M., as transcribed by Korra'ti, R., Today's Cultural Warfare Update, Cultural Warfare Update, 13 April 2007. Online as of 16 April 2007.↩
Barber, M., &quot;Breaking Homosexual 'Silence' with Truth&quot;, Concerned Women for America, 11 April 2007↩
Barber., M. &quot;CWA: Broken Promise in the Promised Land&quot;, Concerned Women for America, 1 February 2007↩
Barber, M., as transcribed by Korra'ti., R., &quot;Today's Cultural Warfare Update&quot;, Cultural Warfare Update, 1 March 2007.↩
Crouse, J., &quot;What about the Morality of Homosexual Behavior?&quot;, Concerned Women for America, 19 March 2007.↩
Knight, R., and Ervin II, K., &quot;The Employment Non-Discrimination Act&quot;, Concerned Women for America, 1 May 2002↩
&quot;The Employment Non-Discrimination Act&quot;, Concerned Women for America, 18 November 1997↩
LaBarbera, P., 15 Good Reasons to Oppose 'Sexual Orientation' (Homosexuality) Codes in Schools&quot;, Concerned Women for America, 19 June 2002↩
LaBarbera, P., 15 Good Reasons to Oppose 'Sexual Orientation' (Homosexuality) Codes in Schools&quot;, Concerned Women for America, 19 June 2002↩
Barber, M., &quot;Breaking Homosexual 'Silence' with Truth&quot;, Concerned Women for America, 11 April 2007↩
&quot;The Employment Non-Discrimination Act&quot;, Concerned Women for America, 18 November 1997↩
Barber, M., &quot;False &lt;U+2018&gt;Hate Crime&lt;U+2019&gt; Reports Fueling Calls for Federal Legislation&quot;, Concerned Women for America, 12 April 2007↩
Barber, M., as transcribed by Korra'ti, R., &quot;Today's Cultural Warfare Update&quot;, Cultural Warfare Update, 13 April 2007. Online as of 23 April 2007.↩
Morgan, K., &quot;Recent Cases Show Homosexual Agenda&lt;U+2019&gt;s Threat to Religious Liberty&quot;, Concerned Women for America, 7 May 2006.↩
Rode, S., &quot;ERA: An Outdated Icon of Radical Feminism&quot;, Concerned Women for America, 27 March 2007.↩
Pulkistenis, H.S. and Bossom, E., &quot;Partial-Birth Abortion: A Chink in the Pro-Abortion Armor&quot;, Concerned Women for America, 22 February 2006. Online as of 16 April 2007.↩
LaRue, J., No &lt;U+2018&gt;Morning-After Pill&lt;U+2019&gt; for Rapists, Concerned Women for America, 16 March 2006. Online as of 16 April 2007.↩
Bossom, E., Contraception or Deception?, Concerned Women for America, 8 March 2002. Online as of 16 April 2007.↩
High-Tech &quot;Birth Control&quot;: Heath Care or Health Risk?, Concerned Women for America pamphlet. Online as of 16 April 2007.↩
Schauer, Linda. 1 May 21, 2008. Accessed 1-2-2009↩
Trenholm, Christopher. Barbara Devaney. Ken Fortson. Lisa Quay. Justin Wheeler. Melissa Clark &quot;Impacts of Four Title V,Section 510 Abstinence Education Programs: Final Report&quot;. April 2007. 2↩
Mosher, Valerie. &quot;CWA Says Study Debunking Abstinence Is Flawed&quot;3 4-13-2007. Accessed 1-2-2009↩
* ↩
Stein, Rob. &quot;Premarital Abstinence Pledges Ineffective, Study Finds&quot;. Washington Post.December 29. 2008.↩
thinkprogress.org↩
MacLeod, L., &quot;School Prayer And Religious Liberty: A Constitutional Perspective'', Concerned Women for America, 1 September 2000. Online as of 16 April 2007.↩
Hurlburt, C., &quot;Design, Darwinism and the Freedom to Learn&quot;, Family Voice, September-October 2001. Online as of 16 April 2007.↩
Kleder, M., &quot;Broadcasters Join Forces; Challenge FCC Indecency Rulings&quot;, Concerned Women for America, 21 April 2007]↩
Kleder, M., &quot;Opie &amp; Anthony Moving to XM Radio&quot;, Concerned Women for America, 9 August 2004.↩
Kleder., F., &quot;FCC Counts Nearly 7,000 &lt;U+201C&gt;Victoria&lt;U+2019&gt;s Secret&lt;U+201D&gt; Complaints as One&quot;, Concerned Women for America, 2 April 2003.↩
Kleder, M., &quot;The Case for A La Carte Cable Pricing&quot;, Concerned Women for America, 7 April 2004. Online as of 20 April 2007.↩
McGinnis, E., &quot;The Horrifying Reality of Sex Trafficking&quot;, Concerned Women for America, 10 December 2004. Online as of 16 April 2007.↩
Vick, H., Embryonic Stem Cell Research: Ethically Wrong Treatment of the Tiniest of Humans, Concerned Women for America, 1 May 2000. Online as of 16 April 2007.↩
* ↩
* ↩
gideon.cwfa.org↩

Matt Barber: Policy Director for Cultural Issues, Concerned Women for America, April 13, 2007. Last accessed 16 April 2007.↩


