

Alpha Phi Omega (commonly known as APO, but also &lt;U+0391&gt;&lt;U+03A6&gt;&lt;U+03A9&gt;, A-Phi-O, and A-Phi-Q) is a co-ed service fraternity organized to provide community service, leadership and social opportunities to college students. The fraternity exists in the United States and the Philippines. The purpose of the fraternity is to assemble college students in a national service fraternity in the fellowship of principles derived from the Scout Oath and Law of the Boy Scouts of America; to develop leadership, to promote friendship and to provide service to humanity; and to further freedom that is our national, educational and intellectual heritage.
Unlike many other fraternities, APO's primary focus is to provide volunteer service within four areas: service to the community, service to the campus, service to the fraternity, and service to the nation as participating citizens. Being primarily a service organization, the fraternity restricts its chapters from maintaining fraternity houses to serve as residences for their members.
Background
Alpha Phi Omega claims to be the largest fraternity on college campuses in the United States. The fraternity has chapters at over 350 colleges, a current active membership of approximately 17,000 and has over 300,000 alumni. Chapters range in size from just a handful of active members at some small colleges to over two hundred active members at larger institutions.
It was founded on December 16, 1925 at Lafayette College in Easton, Pennsylvania, by Frank Reed Horton and 13 other students who were former Boy Scouts and scouters as a way to continue participating in the ideals of Scouting at the college level. (For further information on the founding, see Frank Reed Horton.)
Until 1967, membership in Scouting was a requirement to join. The founders insisted that all those gaining membership must pledge to uphold the fraternity's three cardinal principles of Leadership, Friendship, and Service. The fraternity was opened to women in 1976. All members are called &quot;Brothers&quot;, regardless of gender. The Fraternity views &quot;Brothers&quot; as a gender-neutral term.
Typical fraternity projects include blood drives, tutoring, charity fundraising events, Scouting events, used book exchange, and housing construction/rehabilitation. Signature projects are the annual National Service Week, in the first full week of November, and the National Spring Youth Service Day in April. Many of the operations of individual chapters are left to their own discretion, though most chapters have membership requirements which require a certain number of hours of service each semester. Some chapters of APO claim to complete over 5,000 hours of community service in an academic semester.
Before women were allowed to join APO, several sororities, parallel in ideals but independent in structure, were formed for women who had been Camp Fire Girls or Girl Scouts. These include Gamma Sigma Sigma and Omega Phi Alpha. Also, several chapters had &quot;little sister&quot; groups, some of which (like the Jewels of Tau) formed separate organizations.
Organization
In the United States, Alpha Phi Omega is organized into four levels.

At the top is the National Board of Directors, comprising the elected National Officers and others. These officers are elected at the biennial National Convention to two-year terms and include the National President, National Vice-President, six National Program Directors. Appointed officials include the International Relations Directors, National Archivist, Legal Counsel and others. Alpha Phi Omega has a National Office in Independence, MO. Here the employees run the Fraternity's day-to-day operations, including the National Executive Director and others.
At the next level, the Fraternity is organized into eleven Regions, each headed by an elected Regional Director. Each Director is a member of the National Board, and heads a group of volunteer Regional Staff, usually consisting of alumni of various chapters.
At the next level, the Fraternity is organized into sixty or so sections, each headed by an elected Sectional Chair. The Sectional Chairs are elected to one year terms at the Sections' annual Conferences. The Sections usually cover about a state or so, depending on the number of chapters in an area. In areas with dense populations of colleges there may be several sections per state, each with 8-12 chapters. Many Sectional Chairs have a group of volunteer Sectional Staff, usually consisting of alumni of various chapters.
Finally, there are 350+ Chapters and Alumni Associations.

Notable alumni brothers

H&lt;U+00E9&gt;ctor Luis Acevedo (Omicron Nu), Former Mayor of San Juan, Puerto Rico, Candidate for Governor of Puerto Rico in 1996
Christopher Ashby (Mu Alpha), Former US Ambassador to Uruguay, 1997-2001
Reubin Askew (Iota Rho), Former Governor of Florida
Alden G. Barber (Chi), Boy Scouts of America Chief Scout Executive 1967-1976
H. Roe Bartle known as &quot;The Chief&quot; (Iota), Former mayor of Kansas City, Missouri and namesake of the Kansas City Chiefs
Robert Banks (Beta Omicron) Discoverer (With J. Paul Hogan) of Polypropylene (a plastic) and catalyst for easier creation of the plastic High Density Polyethylene (a plastic).
David Beckley (Psi Lambda(?)), President Rust College, Holly Springs, MS.
Robert Mack Bell (Mu Gamma), Chief Judge Maryland Court of Appeals (Highest Court in Maryland)
Dolph Briscoe (Alpha Rho), Former Governor of Texas
Warren Brown (Kappa Xi), Washington Post Automobile Columnist.
Bill Clinton (Mu Alpha), Forty-second President of the United States
Tom Daschle (Mu Sigma), Former United States Senator from South Dakota, Former United States Senate Majority and Minority Leader
Jospeh V. Doria Jr. (Omicron Sigma), Mayor of Bayonne, New Jersey, New Jersey State Senator , former Speaker of the New Jersey State Assembly
Eugene Eckel (Theta Alpha), Retired President and CEO of AT&amp;T Network Systems International.
Don Eldridge (Alpha Xi), Speaker of the Washington State House of Representatives 1967-1970, Member Washington State House of Reprentatives 1952-1970
Robert D. Flanigan (Upsilon Chi), Vice President and Treasurer for Spelman College
Erik Robert Fleming (Omega Psi), Member Mississippi House of Representatives, District 72. Democratic Nominee for US Senate from Mississippi, 2006.
Mark S. Formby (Epsilon Iota), Member Mississippi House of Representatives, District 108
Marla Graff Decker (Iota Omicron), Virginia Deputy Attorney General for the Criminal Division
Mike Garrett (Alpha Kappa), 1966 Heisman Trophy winner for University of Southern California, Played in NFL for the Kansas City Chiefs and San Diego Chargers. Currently Athletic director for USC.
Alferd Zannie Hall, Jr. (Kappa Delta), General Secretary for Church of God in Christ
Maura Harty (Mu Alpha), Assistant Secretary, Bureau of Consular Affairs &lt;U+2013&gt; United States Department of State, Former US Ambassador to Paraguay, 1997-1999
Mark Hatfield (Epsilon Kappa), Former United States Senator from Oregon, Former Governor of Oregon.
Charles Alexander Harvin (Upsilon Rho), Former South Carolina House of Representatives member District 64 1977-2005, Former South Carolina House of Representatives Majority Leader 1982-1986. (Deceased)
Robert Holden (Beta Mu), Former Governor of Missouri
William T. Holloway (Nu Iota), Member Florida House of Representatives, District 103
Robert C. Hunter (Rho), Associate Justice on the North Carolina Court of Appeals, Former member (1980-1988) North Carolina House of Representatives
John &quot;Jack&quot; Jadel (Zeta Kappa), Retired President, Akzo America
Russell L. Jones (Theta Iota), Member Arizona House of Representatives, District 24
Thomas Kean (Advisor-Pi Upsilon), Former Governor of New Jersey, President of Drew University, Chairman of National Commission on Terrorist Attacks Upon the United States aka the 9/11 Commission
Carson Kressley (Iota Omicron), Fashion expert on the television program Queer Eye for the Straight Guy
H. Martin Lancaster (Rho) Former US House Member from North Carolina, Former member North Carolina House of Representatives, President North Carolina Community College System
Jeffrey S. Lehman (Gamma), Former President of Cornell University
Joseph Leonard (Alpha Rho), President of Leonard Productions, Inc., a record production company. Member Rockabilly Hall of Fame. 1
Bob Love (Kappa Lambda), Former Professional Basketball Player for the Chicago Bulls. Now Director of Community Affairs for Chicago Bulls.
James Lovell (Beta Theta), Astronaut: Apollo 13 Commander, Gemini 7, Gemini 12, and Apollo 8
James McLernon (Epsilon Sigma), Former President of Volkswagen of America
Dan MacMillan (Xi Sigma), President of Bluefield College
Walter Menninger (Zeta), Immediate Past President and CEO of Menninger Foundation, 1993-2001.bio
Terry Miller (Nu Omega), Former Lieutenant Governor of Alaska
Edwin R. Murray (Omega Eta), Member Louisiana State Senate, District 4 ; Former Member Louisiana State House of Representatives, District 96
Roland Nicholson, Jr. (Mu Gamma) Chairman of the Board, The Fortune Society (A prisoner's rights group)
Philip Pfeffer (Zeta Nu), Former Chairman of Random House and Former CEO of Borders Group
Philip Prince (Gamma Lambda), Former President of Clemson University
Ike Skelton (Beta Eta), US House Member from Missouri
H. Patrick Swygert (Zeta Phi), President of Howard University
Hubert Utterback (Advisor-Omega), Former Associate Justice for Iowa Supreme Court, Former US House Member from Iowa, Unsuccessful Candidate for United States Senate
Togo D. West, Jr. (Zeta Phi), Secretary of the Army and Secretary of Veterans Affairs under Former President Clinton
Sidney Williams (Kappa Lambda), Former US Ambassador to The Bahamas, March 1994- September 1998, Played in NFL for the Cleveland Browns, Washington Redskins, Baltimore Colts, and Pittsburgh Steelers. Husband of Maxine Waters, US House Member from California
Willard A. Wirtz (Eta), Former United States Secretary of Labor
Ray O. Wyland (Alpha-Advisor), Former BSA National Director of Education and Former BSA National Director of Division of Relationships. Founding Advisor for Alpha Phi Omega.

Notable honorary brothers

Daniel Carter Beard (National-Honorary), One of the Founders of Boy Scouts of America, Former National Scout Commissioner
J. Caleb Boggs (Zeta Sigma-Honorary), Former US House Member from Delaware, Former Governor of Delaware, Former United States Senator from Delaware
Joe E. Brown (Alpha Kappa) Actor/Comedian, Best known for playing Osgood Fielding III in Some Like It Hot
George H. W. Bush (Alpha Phi-Honorary), Forty-first President of the United States (1000 Points of Light Campaign)
Jimmy Carter (Delta Kappa-Honorary), Thirty-ninth President of the United States
Hillary Rodham Clinton (Alpha Beta Chi-Honorary), Former First Lady of the United States and United States Senator from New York
John J. DeGioia (Mu Alpha-Honorary), President of Georgetown University
Dwight D. Eisenhower (National-Honorary), Thirty-forth President of the United States
Daniel J. Evans (Gamma Alpha-Honorary), Former Governor of Washington and Former United States Senator from Washington
George J. Fisher, MD (National-Honorary), Deputy Chief Scout Executive of BSA (1919-1943), National Scout Commissioner (1943-1960).
Gerald Ford (Gamma Pi-Honorary), Thirty-eighth President of the United States
E. Urner Goodman (National-Honorary), Founder of Order of the Arrow
J. Edgar Hoover (Epsilon Mu-Honorary), Former Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation
Sherman Minton (Mu-Honorary), Former United States Senator from Indiana, Former associate Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States
John F. Kennedy (Epsilon Mu-Honorary), Thirty-fifth President of the United States
John A. Perkins (Zeta Sigma-Honorary), Former President of University of Delaware (1950-1967), Served as US representative to UNESCO (1953-1955), Served as an Undersecretary of United States Department of Health, Education, and Welfare (1956-1957).
Carlos P. Romulo (National-Honorary), President of the Fourth Session of U.N. General Assembly from 1949-1950, and chairman of the U.N. Security Council, January 1957 &amp; December 1957. He had served with General Douglas MacArthur in the Pacific, was Philippines Ambassador to the United States. Won the Pulitzer Prize for Correspondence in 1942, the first Asian to win the Pulitzer Prize.
Adlai Stevenson (Zeta Sigma-Honorary), Democratic Nominee for President of the United States : 1952,1956 . United States Ambassador to the United Nations 1961-1965
James Tarr (National-Honorary), Former Chief Scout Executive of Boy Scouts of America, 1979-1984
Howard Thurman (Zeta Upsilon-Honorary), Theologian, Author and Civil Rights Leader.
James E. West (National-Honorary), First Chief Scout Executive of Boy Scouts of America

All male chapters and co-ed chapters
At the Alpha Phi Omega 1976 National Convention in Atlanta, Georgia, the decision was made to formally welcome females as brothers of the fraternity. Although this had been happening at some chapters on an unofficial basis for a number of years, this constituted the first formal recognition from on the national level. As with many major changes, this one caused a great deal of concern, especially among older, established chapters.
In order to preserve the unity of the fraternity as a whole, a &quot;gentleman's agreement&quot; was crafted over the years following the 1976 National Convention that, informally, allows chapters that were all-male prior to the 1976 National Convention to remain all-male as long as their current charters remain in effect and they don't go inactive. However, at the July 2005 National Board of Directors meeting, a resolution was passed that ruled that Chapters must practice membership policies without regard to gender. The resolution calls for the formation of a committee to assist the current all-male chapters (on co-educational campuses) in their transition to co-ed status. The results of this decision have yet to be determined.
As of 2006, the all-male chapters at co-educational institutions are:




Delta, Auburn University
Gamma Lambda, Clemson University
Gamma Chi, Samford University
Zeta Theta, Drexel University
Eta Chi, Hardin-Simmons University
Kappa Delta, Florida A&amp;M University
Nu Mu, University of Minnesota, Duluth
Xi Nu, Texas Wesleyan University
Xi Sigma, Carson-Newman College




Pi Zeta, Tuskegee University
Pi Chi, Duquesne University
Sigma Xi, The University of Maine
Sigma Pi, Prairie View A&amp;M University
Tau Zeta, Texas Southern University
Phi Zeta, Fort Valley State University
Chi Nu, Grambling State University
Psi Delta, University of Maine at Machias




Alpha Phi Omega in the Philippines
In 1950, Alpha Phi Omega had 227 chapters in the United States. The first chapter was organized in the Philippines that year. Many Filipinos were active in the Boy Scouts. Sol Levy, an APO member from Washington State introduced the organization to Filipino Scouts. Librado Ureta, a graduate student at Far Eastern University in Manila, was among the audience. Inspired by Levy's words, he read the publications and shared them with fellow Eagle Scouts and students on the FEU campus. He asked their opinion about Brother Levy's desire and the response was good. On 2 March 1950, the Alpha Phi Omega International Service Fraternity was chartered on campus.
Alpha Phi Omega grew rapidly in the Philippines. By its third year, seven chapters had been chartered at Manila and Visayan schools and it was registered with the Securities and Exchange Commission as a nonstock, nonprofit and nondividend corporation. Alpha Phi Omega (Phil.) Inc. was the first branch of the fraternity to be chartered outside the USA. It is separate and independent from the organization in the U.S. but it adheres to the cardinal principles designed by Frank Reed Horton.
International Council of Alpha Phi Omega
ESTABLISHMENT: The 1980s brought about renewed contact between Alpha Phi Omega (USA) and Alpha Phi Omega (Philippines). Leaders in both organizations, including national presidents Earle Herbert (USA) and Carlos &quot;Caloy&quot; Caliwara (Philippines) concluded there was a need for an international coordinating body to promote the ideals of the fraternity around the world. This resulted in the birth of the International Council of Alpha Phi Omega (ICAPO) at the 1994 Dallas-Fort Worth Alpha Phi Omega (USA) national convention with the signing of the charter document. The first meeting of the council was held in Zamboanga City in the Philippines at the 1995 Alpha Phi Omega (Philippines) national convention. The second meeting of the council was held in Phoenix 1996 at the Alpha Phi Omega - USA national convention. At that time a formal set of operating policies for the council was signed and the first officers were elected. ICAPO meetings now regularly occur in conjunction with Alpha Phi Omega national conventions in the USA and the Philippines.
PURPOSE: The purpose of this Council is to promote the principles and ideals of Alpha Phi Omega, as originally exemplified by Frank Reed Horton, around the world. To this end, the Council aids in introducing and establishing collegiate-based Alpha Phi Omega organizations in countries where it is not now located and assists in institutionalizing Alpha Phi Omega organizations in countries where it is currently introduced or established. It serves as an official link among the variously established independent national Alpha Phi Omega organizations, and works to promote a deeper understanding and an increased working relationship among the independent national organizations.
EXTENSION: Alpha Phi Omega (USA) committed to the establishment of Alpha Phi Omega of Canada while Alpha Phi Omega (Philippines) committed to the establishment of Alpha Phi Omega of Australia.
References

&quot;The APO History&quot; in &quot;Alpha Phi Omega Torch and Trefoil&quot; diamond jubilee program for the 13th National Biennial Convention, Boy Scouts of the Philippines, Mt. Makiling, Los Banos, Laguna, Philippines, December 1985.
Alpha Phi Omega 2003 Pledge Manual

External links

Alpha Phi Omega - USA National website
Alpha Phi Omega - Philippines National website


List of all U.S. chapters is available here

Category:United States student societies Category:Philippine student societies Category:Boy Scouts of America
