

This article is about the stage musical. For the 1978 film of the same name, see Grease.


Grease is a musical by Jim Jacobs and Warren Casey.
It takes its name from the 1950s United States working-class youth subculture known as the greasers. The musical, set in 1959 in fictional Rydell High in Chicago, focuses on the romance between high schoolers Danny Zuko and Sandy Dumbrowski and tackles such social issues as teenage pregnancy and gang violence; its themes include love, friendship, teenage rebellion, sexual exploration during adolescence and, to some extent, class consciousness/class conflict.
The show's original 1971 incarnation was a play with incidental music1 staged at the Kingston Mines Theater in the Old Town section of Chicago. Producers Ken Waissman and Maxine Fox saw it and suggested to the playwrights it might work better as a full-scale musical, and told them if they were willing to rework it and if they liked the end result, they would produce it off-Broadway. The team headed to New York City and after additional collaboration and refinements, Grease opened at the Eden Theatre in downtown Manhattan on February 14, 1972. Excellent reviews and brisk box-office business prompted the producers to move it uptown.
The Broadway production, directed by Tom Moore and choreographed by Patricia Birch (who eventually went to direct the ill-fated sequel of the film adaptation of Grease), opened June 7, 1972 at the Broadhurst Theatre, where it ran for five months before transferring to the Royale. It remained there for more than seven years before moving to the Majestic to complete its 3388-performance run. The original cast included Barry Bostwick as Danny and Carole Demas as Sandy, with Adrienne Barbeau, Timothy Meyers, and Walter Bobbie in supporting roles. Replacements later in the run included Jeff Conaway, Marilu Henner, Peter Gallagher, Ilene Graff, Judy Kaye, Patrick Swayze, John Travolta, Jerry Zaks, and Treat Williams.
The show went on to become a West End hit, a hugely successful film, a popular 1994 Broadway revival, and a staple of regional theatre, summer stock, community theatre, and high school drama groups.
After twenty previews, a Broadway revival directed and choreographed by Jeff Calhoun opened on May 11 1994 at the Eugene O'Neill Theatre, where it ran for 1505 performances. The original cast included Ricky Paull Goldin as Danny and Susan Wood as Sandy, with Megan Mullally, Rosie O'Donnell, Sam Harris, and Marcia Lewis in supporting roles. Replacements later in the run included Debby Boone, Marilyn Cooper, Mickey Dolenz, Chubby Checker, Sheena Easton, Joely Fisher, Sutton Foster, Jasmine Guy, Jennifer Holliday, Al Jarreau, Lucy Lawless, Darlene Love, Maureen McCormick, Mackenzie Phillips, Joe Piscopo, Tracy Nelson, Jon Secada, Brooke Shields, Sally Struthers, Jody Watley, Marissa Jaret Winokur, Jo Anne Worley, and Adrian Zmed.
A second Broadway revival, directed and choreographed by Kathleen Marshall, is scheduled to begin previews in July 2007. Max Crumm and Laura Osnes were selected to portray Danny and Sandy via viewer votes cast during the run of the NBC reality series Grease: You're the One that I Want!. The original score will be embellished with tunes written for the film adaptation: &quot;Hopelessly Devoted to You,&quot; &quot;Sandy,&quot; &quot;You're the One That I Want,&quot; and the title number. A West End revival, with the leads similarly cast via ITV's Grease Is The Word, is also scheduled.
Synopsis
In 1959, Rydell High School's rebellious, thrill-loving students welcome new student Sandy Dumbrowski. She and the leader of the tough Burger Palace Boys gang, Danny Zuko, had a brief love affair the summer before, but the summer ended for them with unresolved feelings. In describing the fling, Sandy focuses on the emotional attachment she and Danny had, while Danny stresses the physical aspects of their relationship. Sandy and Danny soon bump into each other at school, and while Sandy is happy to see Danny, he blows her off, pretending to be too cool. At Marty's pajama party, the girls experiment with wine, cigarettes and pierced ears, and Marty tells about her long-distance courtship with a Marine. The boys focus on fast cars, mooning and the upcoming school dance. Danny sees Sandy again and tries to apologize for his behavior, but she is hurt to find out that he has told his friends that she is &quot;easy.&quot;
Sandy stays away from the school dance. Meanwhile, Frenchie drops out of beauty school when she fails all her classes. Danny and Cha-Cha win the dance contest, and Rizzo gets back together with her guy, Kenickie. But Danny misses Sandy and takes up track to win back her affections. But when they meet next, he moves too fast for her. Meanwhile, Danny doesn't know that the Boys have been challenged to a rumble by Cha-Cha's friends. Rizzo is worried that she's pregnant, but she's so mad at Kenickie that she tells him he's not the father. Rizzo doesn't want Sandy's sympathy, and Sandy still feels she has trouble fitting in at the new school. The next time Sandy sees Danny and the Burger Palace Boys, she has transformed herself into a greaser's dream date, leaving Danny &quot;All Choked Up.&quot; Rizzo is relieved to learn that she isn't pregnant, and she and Kenickie reunite. All ends happily.
Roles

Betty Rizzo &lt;U+2014&gt; Leader of the Pink Ladies. Has an attitude and a crass personality. Highly attractive and loud. (mezzo-soprano)
Danny Zuko &lt;U+2014&gt; Leader of the Burger Palace Boys. Handsome and popular. (baritone)
Frenchy &lt;U+2014&gt; Pink Lady who eventually drops out of school to enter Beauty School. Somewhat simple, but in no way innocent. (soprano)
Kenickie &lt;U+2014&gt; A tough member of the Burger Palace Boys and a car fanatic. Originally a no-neck sidekick to Danny, post-movie productions make Kenickie a good-looking co-leader of the Burger Palace Boys. (baritone)
Sandy Dumbrowski &lt;U+2014&gt; New, wholesome, and innocent girl in town, with the potential be a sexpot. (soprano)
Doody &lt;U+2014&gt; The youngest member of the Burger Palace Boys. Simple in the same way as Frenchy, but much more innocent. Must have excellent high belt. (tenor)
Jan &lt;U+2014&gt; Funny, loud-mouthed, overweight member of the Pink Ladies gang. (mezzo-soprano)
Roger &lt;U+2014&gt; A jolly, prankster member of the Burger Palace Boys. (tenor)
Cha-Cha &lt;U+2014&gt; Originally, a loud, gorilla-looking, booger-picking blind date who happened to be a good dancer. Post-movie productions see Cha-Cha as a very sexy but low-class girl. (alto)
Eugene Florczyk &lt;U+2014&gt; A pompous but gullible nerd. (n/a)
Johnny Casino &lt;U+2014&gt; Wanna-be rock-star student at Rydell High. (baritone)
Marty &lt;U+2014&gt; Most attractive member of the Pink Ladies gang. Tries to act older, but her intelligence reveals her true age.(mezzo-soprano)
Miss Lynch &lt;U+2014&gt; A no-nonsense English teacher. (n/a)
Patty Simcox&lt;U+2014&gt; A pretty, peppy, preppy cheerleader. (n/a)
Sonny &lt;U+2014&gt; The Italian-American &quot;Wise Guy&quot; of the Burger Palace Boys. (baritone)
Teen Angel &lt;U+2014&gt; Guardian Angel that tries to guide Frenchie when she drops out of beauty school. An attractive, smooth-voiced singer. (baritone)
Vince Fontaine &lt;U+2014&gt; An egotistical, slimy radio disk jockey trying to relive his teenage years.
Burger Palace Boys &lt;U+2014&gt; The boys' gang of working-class &quot;greasers.&quot;
Pink Ladies &lt;U+2014&gt; The elitist girls' gang.

Song list
Act I

Alma Mater - Miss Lynch, Patty Simcox and Eugene Florczyk
Alma Mater Parody - Pink Ladies and Burger Palace Boys
Summer Nights - Sandy Dumbrowski, Danny Zuko, Pink Ladies and Burger Palace Boys
Those Magic Changes - Doody, Burger Palace Boys and Pink Ladies
Freddy, My Love - Marty, Leather, Jan, Frenchy and Betty Rizzo
Greased Lightning - Kenickie and Burger Palace Boys
Mooning - Roger and Jan
Look at Me, I'm Sandra Dee - Betty Rizzo
We Go Together - Pink Ladies and Burger Palace Boys

Act II

Shakin' at the High School Hop - Company
It's Raining on Prom Night - Sandy Dumbrowski
Shakin' at the High School Hop (Reprise) - Company
Born to Hand Jive - Johnny Casino and Company
Beauty School Dropout - Teen Angel, Frenchy and Company
Alone at a Drive in Movie - Danny Zuko and Burger Palace Boys
Rock N'Roll Party Queen - Doody and Roger
There are Worse Things I Could Do - Betty Rizzo
Look at Me, I'm Sandra Dee (Reprise) - Sandy Dumbrowski
All Choked Up - Sandy Dumbrowski, Danny Zuko and Company
We Go Together (Reprise) - Company

Awards and nominations
1972 production

Tony Award for Best Musical (nominee)
Tony Award for Best Book (nominee)
Tony Award for Best Actor in a Musical (Barry Bostwick, nominee)
Tony Award for Best Featured Actor in a Musical (Timothy Meyers, nominee)
Tony Award for Best Featured Actress in a Musical (Adrienne Barbeau, nominee)
Tony Award for Best Costume Design (nominee)
Tony Award for Best Choreography (nominee)
Theatre World Award (Barbeau, winner)
Drama Desk Award for Outstanding Choreography (winner)
Drama Desk Award for Most Promising Costume Design (winner)

1994 revival

Theatre World Award (Brooke Shields, winner)
Tony Award for Best Revival of a Musical (nominee)
Tony Award for Best Featured Actress in a Musical (Marcia Lewis, nominee)
Tony Award for Best Choreography (nominee)
Drama Desk Award for Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Musical (Sam Harris, nominee)
Drama Desk Award for Outstanding Choreography (nominee)

Footnotes



References

Synopsis and other information
Newsday (Jan. 7, 2007): &quot;Hopelessly Devoted to Grease&quot;, by Linda Winer
Understudy (magazine of the Fulton Theatre, Lancaster, PA, Volume 1, September 2006)

External links

Internet Broadway Database listing
Official website for 2007 Broadway revival
Official website for West End production
Grease on Broadway 2007


de:Grease (Musical) fr:Grease no:Grease (musical) pl:Grease fi:Grease (musikaali) sv:Grease
Category:Rock musicals Grease (musical) Grease (musical) Grease (musical) Grease (musical)



Sharbutt, Jay. Associated Press (Nov. 4, 1979): Untitled article about Grease; quoted in The Estate Project for Artists with AIDS: Warren Casey - Music Archive Catalog↩


