
The Rochester Subway  or Rochester Industrial and Rapid Transit Railway was an underground rapid transit system in the city of Rochester, New York from 1928 to 1956. Contemporary photos show it used single streetcar vehicles like Boston's Green Line, and so using today's terms would likely be described as a light rail system, even though a large portion of it ran underground. Unlike the Green Line, the Rochester Subway ran on its own private, grade-separated right of way through its entire length.
History
In 1900, the Erie Canal was re-routed to bypass downtown Rochester, and in 1919 the abandoned canal was bought to serve as the core of the subway. The subway was built below, and the subway's roof was turned into Broad Street. Only two miles of the Rochester Subway were actually located in the tunnel. The rest of the route was located in an open cut. The term &quot;subway&quot; did not refer to the tunnel, but to the fact that the route was grade-separated and operated as rapid transit. Connecting interurban lines were routed into the subway connection, and off city streets, further easing the surface traffic congestion that was developing in Rochester.
When the Utica streetcar system was abandoned in the late 1930s, New York State Railways transferred the relatively new steel cars to Rochester to replace the 2000-series center-door cars that had been in service since the opening of the subway. The Utica cars served until the end of passenger service on June 30, 1956. Car #60 was saved for preservation, and is currently undergoing restoration by the Rochester Chapter, NRHS.
The subway from Court Street to Rowlands was replaced by the Eastern Expressway in 1956. Limited freight service operated by connecting railroads lasted on the subway route from Court Street to General Motors until 1976, when the City of Rochester elected to fill the cut to eliminate the numerous bridges. Rail freight deliveries in the actual subway tunnel continued until 1996, when Gannett Newspapers moved their printing operations to another location.
Stations
Stations on the subway (in order from west to east) consisted of:

Kodak Park (via Dewey Ave surface route)
General Motors (loop and shops location)
Driving Park
Lexington Avenue
Glenwood
Emerson Street
Edgerton Park
Lyell Avenue
West Main Street
City Hall
Court Street
Clinton Avenue
Meigs-Goodman
Monroe Avenue
Culver Road
Colby
Winton Road (former shops location)
East Avenue
Halfway
Highland
Ashbourne
Elmwood Avenue
Sunset
Rowlands (loop)

Fleet

L1 locomotive - electric locomotive
L2 locomotive - Plymouth Locomotive Works of Plymouth, Ohio - 1937
0205 locomotive - Jewett Car Company of Newark, Ohio - 1903

Current rapid transit proposals
Now, the subway sits abandoned. There is much controversy over what should be done with it. In the words of Laurie Mercer, &quot;It&lt;U+2019&gt;s either a giant hole waiting to be filled with dirt or an impressive asset in a city that needs to revitalize its downtown.&quot;1
Rochester officials want to do something with the old tunnels, because it costs them an estimated $1.2 million in repairs and shoring up every year to maintain them as they are.2 There were proposals to use some of the old tunnels in a new Rochester rapid transit system. Another proposal was to transform the Broad Street Aqueduct into an underground walkway connecting the Rochester Riverside Convention Center with the Blue Cross Arena. A component of this walkway would include a Rochester Transportation Museum. Some suggested filling the remaining subway tunnel with water, re-routing the Erie Canal and restoring the aqueduct to its original purpose.
But the proposal Rochester city officials decided on, in 2004, was to fill the remaining subway tunnel with dirt. This decision caused public outcry in Rochester, where residents regard the subway as part of their history.3
On June 15, 2006, the city promised to form a committee to investigate all possible options. The committee should reveal its decision in 2008.
References

External links


&quot;The End of the Line&quot; on DVD - a documentary about the Rochester Subway.
Railroad.net's page devoted to the Rochester Subway.
Rochester Wiki - Abandoned Subway
A modern-day tour of the Rochester Subway at Infiltration.org.
A slideshow from Urban infiltrators who explored the Rochester Subway.
1928 map of the Rochester Subway.
Map of possible extensions to the Rochester Subway.
Site of the ''Rochester Rail Transit Committee.
Pictures from the construction of the tunnels.
Car 60 from Rochester Subway at the Rochester &amp; Genesee Valley RR Museum
L2 Engine under restoration at the New York Museum of Transportation

ja:&lt;U+30ED&gt;&lt;U+30C1&gt;&lt;U+30A7&gt;&lt;U+30B9&gt;&lt;U+30BF&gt;&lt;U+30FC&gt;&lt;U+5730&gt;&lt;U+4E0B&gt;&lt;U+9244&gt;
Category:Defunct New York railroads Category:Transportation in Rochester, New York Category:Tram transport Category:Underground rapid transit systems



↩




