
Megalonyx jeffersonii, or Jefferson's ground sloth, is an extinct species of giant ground sloth that lived from the Illinoian glaciation during the Middle Pleistocene (150,000 years BP) through to the Rancholabrean of the Late Pleistocene (10,000 BC). It was the last surviving member of the family Megalonychidae.
This species ranged widely in North America. It belongs to the genus Megalonyx, a name proposed by Thomas Jefferson &lt;U+2014&gt; future president of the United States &lt;U+2014&gt; in 1797. (Jefferson's surname was appended to the animal as the specific epithet in 1822 by the French zoologist Anselme Ga&lt;U+00EB&gt;tan Desmarest.)
Description
M. jeffersonii was a large, heavily built animal about 8 to 10 feet (2.5-3 m) long. Its maximum weight may have been as much as 800 pounds (360 kg). This is medium-sized among the giant ground sloths. Like other ground sloths it had a blunt snout, massive jaw, and large peg-like teeth. The hind limbs were plantigrade (flat-footed) and this, along with its stout tail, allowed it to rear up into a semi-erect position to feed on tree leaves. The forelimbs had three highly developed claws that were probably used to strip leaves and tear off branches.
Range
M. jeffersonii was apparently the most wide ranging giant ground sloth. Fossils are known from many Pleistocene sites in the United States, including most of the states east of the Rocky Mountains as well as along the west coast. It was the only ground sloth to range as far north as the present-day Yukon1 and Alaska.2
Fossil history
Jefferson's &quot;Certain Bones&quot;
In 1796, Colonel John Stuart sent Thomas Jefferson some fossil bones (a femur fragment, ulna, radius, and some foot bones including three large claws) from a cave in Greenbrier County, Virginia (present-day West Virginia). In 1797, Jefferson presented a paper on &quot;Certain Bones&quot; to the American Philosophical Society in Philadelphia. He theorized that they were the remains of an extinct lion which he named Megalonyx (&quot;giant claw&quot;).3

Claws of Megalonyx jeffersonii

Jefferson is considered to have initiated the science of vertebrate paleontology in the United States with the reading of this paper. In 1799, Dr. Caspar Wistar correctly identified the remains as belonging to a giant ground sloth. In 1822 Wistar proposed naming it Megalonyx jeffersonii in honor of the former president.45 Desmarest then published it as such.
Which cave?
For many decades, Jefferson's &quot;Certain Bones&quot; had been assumed to have come from Organ Cave in what is now Greenbrier County, West Virginia. In 1993, two fragments of a Megalonyx scapula were found in Haynes Cave in neighboring Monroe County. In 1995, Smithsonian paleontologist Frederick Grady proposed6 that Haynes Cave was the true original source of Jefferson's fossil.
Grady&lt;U+2019&gt;s reasons had to do with historical land-ownership records. Jefferson reported that the bones had been found by saltpeter workers and gave the cave owner&lt;U+2019&gt;s name as Frederic Crower, an apparent mis-spelling (according to Grady) of Frederic Gromer. Correspondence between Jefferson and Colonel Stuart, who sent him the bones, indicates that the cave was about five miles from Stuart&lt;U+2019&gt;s home and contained saltpeter vats. Grady believes that Organ Cave can be eliminated as the source cave as it was never owned by Gromer. In addition, two letters written by the subsequent owner of the cave -- Tristram Patton -- indicate that the cave was in Monroe County near Second Creek. (Monroe County, originally part of Greenbrier County, was separated shortly after the discovery of the bones.) In the letters, Patton described the cave and indicated that more bones were there.7 Today, the proprietors of Organ Cave continue to insist on their property as the origin of the fossil in their interpretative exhibits and tour guide presentations.
M. jeffersonii is still the most commonly identified species of Megalonyx. It was designated the state fossil of West Virginia in 2008.
References




Category:Prehistoric sloths Category:Pleistocene mammals Category:Megafauna of North America



↩
↩
Jefferson, Thomas, &quot;A Memoir on the Discovery of Certain Bones of a Quadruped of the Clawed Kind in the Western Parts of Virginia&quot;, Read before the American Philosophical Society, March 10, 1797.↩
Jefferson, Thomas (1799), &lt;U+201C&gt;A Memoir on the Discovery of Certain Bones of a Quadruped of the Clawed Kind in the Western Parts of Virginia&lt;U+201D&gt;, Transactions of the American Philosophical Society, Vol. 4 pp. 246-260.↩
Wistar, Caspar (1799), &lt;U+201C&gt;A Description of the Bones Deposited, by the President, in the Museum of the Society, and Represented in the Annexed Plates&quot;, Transactions, pp. 526-531, plates.↩
Grady, Fred (1995), &quot;The Search for the Cave from which Thomas Jefferson Described the Bones of the Megalonyx&quot; [Abstract], In: &quot;Selected Abstracts from the 1995 National Speleological Society National Convention in Blacksburg, Virginia&quot;; In: Journal of Cave and Karst Studies, April 1997, pg 57.↩
Grady (1995), Op. cit.↩


