
Francis Brown Wai (April 14, 1917 - October 20, 1944) was a captain in the United States Army who received the Medal of Honor for actions during the recapture of the Philippines from Japan in 1944. He was initially awarded the Distinguished Service Cross (DSC), the United States' second highest decoration for valor. However after an extensive review, in 2000, his medal was upgraded to the Medal of Honor.12 , Wai is the only Chinese-American3 and the first Asian-American officer to receive the medal.4
Biography
Wai was the child of a Native Hawaiian mother and a Chinese father. Growing up, he often surfed with Duke Kahanamoku, regarded as the father of the sport of surfing, and Buster Crabbe, who later become an actor.5 He attended the Punahou School in Honolulu and went to college at the Sacramento Junior College before transferring to UCLA. While at UCLA, he was a four sport athlete. Wai graduated in 1939 with a Bachelor's Degree in Banking and Finance.6 He intended to work alongside his father in real estate and banking but instead joined the military.7
 After school, Wai enlisted in the Hawaii National Guard and was called into active duty before the United States' entrance into World War II. He received a commission as an officer through Officer Candidate School in 1941.8 His commission was rare at the time because few Asian-Americans were allowed to serve in combat leadership roles.910 He was eventually assigned to the 34th Infantry Regiment of the 24th Infantry Division with the rank of Captain.11 The 24th Division, based at Schofield Barracks, Oahu, was among the first American units to be involved in the Pacific Theater as they exchanged fire with Japanese aircraft during the attack on Pearl Harbor. After almost two years guarding Hawaii from Japanese invasion, the division moved to Australia for training, then attacked and captured the Hollandia Airdrome on the northwest coast of New Guinea. Wai's regiment landed on nearby Biak Island, where it helped the 41st Infantry Division secure three other Japanese airfields.
In 1944, Wai was posthumously awarded the Distinguished Service Cross for valor during the invasion of Leyte, Philippines where he led an amphibious assault on a Japanese pillbox in which he was subsequently killed. After the war, his remains were interred at the National Memorial Cemetery of the Pacific in Hawaii.12
DSC upgraded to Medal of Honor
 In 1996, Congress directed Secretary of the Army, Louis Caldera to conduct a review of military records to determine whether or not Asian Americans who fought in uniform during World War II were treated unfairly due to prejudice.13.14 The review concluded that 22 Asian Americans including Wai, were not given full consideration for the Medal of Honor. In 2000, Wai's Distinguished Service Cross was upgraded to the Medal of Honor. Of those whose medals were upgraded, Wai was one of only two who did not belong to the predominantly Japanese American 442nd Regimental Combat Team/100th Infantry Battalion; the other being Rudolph B. Davila of the 7th Infantry.15
Medal of Honor citation
Rank and organization: Captain, U.S. Army, Headquarters, 34th Infantry Place and date: Leyte, Philippine Islands, October 20, 1944 Entered service at: Honolulu, Hawaii Born: Honolulu, Hawaii
Citation:


Captain Francis B. Wai distinguished himself by extraordinary heroism in action, on 20 October 1944, in Leyte, Philippine Islands. Captain Wai landed at Red Beach, Leyte, in the face of accurate, concentrated enemy fire from gun positions advantageously located in a palm grove bounded by submerged rice paddies. Finding the first four waves of American soldiers leaderless, disorganized, and pinned down on the open beach, he immediately assumed command. Issuing clear and concise orders, and disregarding heavy enemy machine gun and rifle fire, he began to move inland through the rice paddies without cover. The men, inspired by his cool demeanor and heroic example, rose from their positions and followed him. During the advance, Captain Wai repeatedly determined the locations of enemy strong points by deliberately exposing himself to draw their fire. In leading an assault upon the last remaining Japanese pillbox in the area, he was killed by its occupants. Captain Wai's courageous, aggressive leadership inspired the men, even after his death, to advance and destroy the enemy. His intrepid and determined efforts were largely responsible for the rapidity with which the initial beachhead was secured. Captain Wai's extraordinary heroism and devotion to duty are in keeping with the highest traditions of military service and reflect great credit on him, his unit, and the United States Army.



16
Awards and Recognitions
Among Wai's decorations and medals were the following:

  Medal of Honor
  Purple Heart
  American Campaign Medal
  Asiatic-Pacific Campaign Medal
  World War II Victory Medal

Badges:

  Combat Infantryman Badge

Foreign Decorations:

  Philippine Liberation Medal

See also



List of Medal of Honor recipients
List of Medal of Honor recipients for World War II
List of Chinese Americans

References

ISBN 1563119951
ISBN 0979689619

Notes

External links

Native Hawaiians in World War II
Asian Week.com article
World War II Congressional Medal of Honor Recipient Captain Francis Brown Wai, US Army 34th Infantry



Category:1917 births Category:1944 deaths Category:American military personnel killed in World War II Category:Army Medal of Honor recipients Category:United States Army officers Category:Asian Americans in the United States Military Category:Punahou School alumni Category:Chinese Americans Category:Native Hawaiians Category:People from Honolulu, Hawaii



↩
↩
↩
Owens, op. cit. p 22↩
↩
↩

Sterner, op. cit. p 135↩



↩


↩
↩


