
YMedia Labs (pronounced &lt;U+201C&gt;y-media-labs&lt;U+201D&gt;) is a holistic mobile application development company headquartered in San Francisco, US. It is founded and managed by Stanford and Harvard alum who had been part of various acquisitions in the past. The firm also has its presence in New York, US and Bangalore, India. Established in 2009. It's main goal is to help people and business realize their mobile potential. Also to provide end-to-end solutions in mobile app development. It created a niche in the industry with specialization to understand, develop, deliver and deploy mobile applications across all major platforms including Apple iOS (iPad, iPhone, iPod Touch), RIM BlackBerry, Google Android, Microsoft Windows Mobile and Symbian. Y Media Labs takes pride in creating app for some of the major brands in the world. Their app Intro to Letters got feature in Apple commercial and lately their app for Lonely Planet got featured in iPhone 5 commercial.
Achievements
It's major releases have been featured in Top 20 apps in app store. In Apple's national TV commercials more than once and had been chosen as best apps of 2010 by Apple. It has also been ranked as the No.1 iOS development firm in US by various agencies. It was named the Best iPhone Development Company for the month of November 2012 by sourcingline.com12 It has a place in the Best Web Design Agencies's directory.3 There're some other achievements down here.

Featured in Apple Commercial for an app Intro to Letters
Featured in iPhone 5 Commercial for an app Lonely Planet
Ranked No1 in App Development House by
Ranked No2 in App Development by
Featured in &quot;This Week in iPad&quot;
Featured in CNBC for WDC - Apple
Featured in Best App Ever Awards for an App - Nom Nom Paleo

Major Clients

Safeway_Inc.
BudLight
Genentech
Stanford_University
Footlocker.com
Le_Meridien
Lonely_Planet
BBC

References

External links



Category:Software companies of the United States Category:Product development



↩
↩
↩


