

Mark Eric May (born November 2, 1959 in Oneonta, New York) is a former American football offensive lineman in the National Football League. He is currently a football analyst.
Biography
Football career
In his senior year at the University of Pittsburgh, May received the Outland Trophy as the nation's top collegiate interior lineman. The university retired May's number (73) in 2001, and he was inducted into the College Football Hall of Fame in 2005.1
May was drafted with the 20th pick of the first round of the 1981 NFL Draft and played guard for the Washington Redskins. He was a member of the famed &quot;Hogs&quot; offensive line, which was instrumental in the Redskins' victories in Super Bowl XVII and XXII (though May was injured for the 1982 season and did not participate in Super Bowl XVII). He was named one of the 70 greatest Redskins of all time.2
Following his tenure with the Redskins, May played for the San Diego Chargers (1991) and Arizona Cardinals (1992–93) before his retirement in 1993.
Broadcasting career
In 1995, May was hired by TNT as a studio analyst on its Sunday Night Football broadcasts. In 1997, May became a game analyst for the Sunday Night Football broadcasts on TNT3. After TNT lost the broadcasting rights to Sunday Night Football following the 1997 season, May joined CBS Sports in 1998 as a game analyst for its NFL coverage from 1998–2000.
In 2001, May joined ESPN as a football analyst and commentator, specializing in college football. Along with Lou Holtz, he is currently a regular on the popular College Football Scoreboard and College Football Final as well as appearing on pregame, halftime, and postgame coverage during the season, and on College Football Live in the off-season, and offers analysis on ESPN2 and ESPNews. He was also present in the NFL Live studio throughout the entire 2007 NFL Draft. In 2005, he wrote Mark May's Tales from the Washington Redskins, a book detailing his experiences with the Washington Redskins.
References

External links

http://pittsburghpanthers.collegesports.com/sports/m-footbl/spec-rel/101705aam.html - University of Pittsburgh article detailing May's tenure with the school.
















es:Mark May pt:Mark May
Category:1959 births Category:Living people Category:People from Otsego County, New York Category:American football offensive guards Category:American football offensive tackles Category:College Football Hall of Fame inductees Category:National Conference Pro Bowl players Category:National Football League announcers Category:Phoenix Cardinals players Category:Pittsburgh Panthers football players Category:San Diego Chargers players Category:The Hogs Category:Washington Redskins players Category:College football announcers



University of Pittsburgh Official Athletic Site↩
Washington Redskins↩
Turner Sports - NFL on TNT↩


