
Cottonmouth is a fictional super villain in the Marvel Comics Universe.
Fictional character biography
Originally from Mobile, Alabama, Cottonmouth was chosen by Sidewinder to join a snake-themed villain group, the Serpent Society.1 With the ability to extend his jaws over a foot wide, he was given steel fangs, possibly by the Roxxon Oil Company, which he uses to torture his victims in an almost cannibalistic way. His jaw muscles are superhumanly strong, and can bite with sufficient force to crush cinderblock or metals that are softer than iron. However, very little is known about his past, other than the fact that he was an active criminal in the southern portion of the United States.
Cottonmouth was often paired up with Asp, such as when the two were to advertise the Serpent Society to Kingpin.2 The Serpent Society was hired by AIM to hunt down M.O.D.O.K.. During their confrontation with MODOK, Cottonmouth and fellow teammate Death Adder were able to slay him, which was a big win for their organization. Cottonmouth also battled Captain America for the fist time.3 They were soon defeated by Captain America, but were able to escape. He also participated in the mission to retrieve the retired Porcupine's costume, which turned out to be a trap by Captain America. Cottonmouth was injured during the battle, his teeth being destroyed by the star-spangled hero's shield. He, along with teammates Rattler and Death Adder were eventually defeated and taken into custody. Not for long, however, as Sidewinder soon teleported them to safety.4 Cottonmouth and Rattler next confronted the Kingpin's men over Death Adder's murder.5
During the Viper's invasion, Cottonmouth sided with Diamondback and the other members who refused to take the leadership away from Sidewinder. He later betrayed Diamondback, attempting to bite her head off after she saved him, proving that his loyalties lied with Viper. He fought Steve Rogers as The Captain during this confrontation.6 Cottonmouth participated in the Serpent Society's mission to recover mystic objects for Ghaur and Llyra, and battled Psylocke and Storm of the X-Men.7 He voted against Diamondback during the Serpent Society's trial against her. Alongside the Serpent Society, he battled Captain America. Paladin, and Diamondback.8
He has also battled other super-heroes such as Black Panther and Luke Cage. He was eventually imprisoned, but escaped and fought the Thunderbolts. He also took Bushmaster's real name, Quincy McIver, for a short while, though his actual name has not been revealed. It is presumed he is still in prison, as he was not seen with the Serpent Society during their latest mission.
Powers and abilities
Due to bionic reconstruction, Cottonmouth possesses enhanced jaw and neck muscles, and steel teeth enabling him to bite with sufficient force to crush cinderblock or deform metals softer than iron; to hang from a rope by his teeth for up to an hour, and to open his mouth larger than the size of a human head. His teeth (including abnormally large canines) have been replaced by steel, and his jaw and neck have been bionically enhanced and specially hinged to enable his mouth to open large than the size of a human head, and he has superhuman strength in his jaw muscles.
Other characters named Cottonmouth
The Serpent Society's Cottonmouth is not to be confused with another criminal named Cottonmouth who once fought Luke Cage.9
References

External links

http://www.marvunapp.com/Appendix4/cottonmouthss.htm
http://marvel.com/universe/Cottonmouth_%28mercenary%29

Category:Black supervillains Category:Fictional African-Americans Category:Fictional characters from Alabama Category:Fictional cyborgs Category:Fictional mercenaries Category:Marvel Comics characters with superhuman strength Category:Marvel Comics mutates Category:Marvel Comics supervillains



Captain America #310↩
Captain America #311↩
Captain America #312-313↩
Captain America #315↩
Captain America #319↩
Captain America #341-342↩
Uncanny X-Men Annual #13↩
Captain America #380-382↩
Power Man #18-20↩


