Precipitation types can include the character or phase of the precipitation which is falling to ground level. There are three distinct ways that rain can occur. These methods include convective, stratiform, and orographic rainfall. Convective precipitation is more intense, and of shorter duration, than stratiform precipitation. Precipitation can also fall in two phases, whether liquid or solid. Liquid forms of precipitation include rain and drizzle. Rain or drizzle which freezes on contact within a subfreezing air mass gains the preceding word of freezing, becoming known as freezing rain or freezing drizzle. Frozen forms of precipitation include snow, ice needles, sleet, hail, and graupel. __NOTOC__
Phases
Precipitation falls in various forms, or phases. They can be subdivided into:

Liquid precipitation:

Drizzle (DZ)
Rain (RA)



Freezing precipitation:

Freezing drizzle (FZDZ)
Freezing rain (FZRA)



Frozen precipitation:

Snow (SN)
Snow grains (SG)
Ice pellets (PL)
Hail (GR)
Snow pellets/Graupel (GS)
Ice crystals (IC).


The capital letters in the parentheses are the METAR codes for each phenomenon.1
Convection

A large cumulonimbus cloud, with rain falling out on the right.

Convection occurs when the Earth's surface within a conditionally unstable, or moist atmosphere, becomes heated more than its surroundings, leading to significant upward motion. Convective rain, or showery precipitation, occurs from convective clouds, e.g., cumulonimbus or cumulus congestus. It falls as showers with rapidly changing intensity. Convective precipitation falls over a certain area for a relatively short time, as convective clouds have limited horizontal extent. Most precipitation in the tropics appears to be convective; however, it has been suggested that stratiform precipitation also occurs in mature thunderstorms.23 Graupel and hail indicate convection.4 In mid-latitudes, convective precipitation is associated with cold fronts (often behind the front), squall lines, and warm fronts in very moist air.
Stratiform


Illustration clouds overriding a warm front

Stratiform rainfall is caused by frontal systems surrounding extratropical cyclones or lows, which form when warm and often tropical air meets cooler air. When masses of air with different density (moisture and temperature characteristics) meet, warmer air overrides colder air, causing precipitation. In turn, precipitation can enhance the temperature and moisture contrast along a frontal boundary. Fronts cause sudden, enigmatic changes in general temperature, and in the humidity and pressure in the air. Warm fronts occur where the warm air scours out a previously lodged cold air mass. The warm air 'overrides' the cooler air and moves upward. Warm fronts are followed by extended periods of light rain and drizzle, because, after the warm air rises above the cooler air (which sinks to the ground), it gradually cools due to the air's expansion while being lifted, which forms clouds and leads to precipitation. Cold fronts occur when a mass of cooler air dislodges a mass of warm air. This type of transition is sharper, since cold air is more dense than warm air. The rain duration is less, and generally more intense, than that which occurs ahead of warm fronts. A wide variety of weather can be found along an occluded front, with thunderstorms possible, but usually their passage is associated with a drying of the air mass.
Orographic
 Orographic or relief rainfall is caused when masses of air pushed by wind are forced up the side of elevated land formations, such as large mountains. The lift of the air up the side of the mountain results in adiabatic cooling, and ultimately condensation and precipitation. In mountainous parts of the world subjected to relatively consistent winds (for example, the trade winds), a more moist climate usually prevails on the windward side of a mountain than on the leeward (downwind) side. Moisture is removed by orographic lift, leaving drier air (see katabatic wind) on the descending (generally warming), leeward side where a rain shadow is observed.5
In Hawaii, Mount Wai&lt;U+02BB&gt;ale&lt;U+02BB&gt;ale (Waialeale), on the island of Kauai, is notable for its extreme rainfall, as it has the second highest average annual rainfall on Earth, with .6 Storm systems affect the state with heavy rains between October and March. Local climates vary considerably on each island due to their topography, divisible into windward (Koolau) and leeward (Kona) regions based upon location relative to the higher mountains. Windward sides face the east to northeast trade winds and receive much more rainfall; leeward sides are drier and sunnier, with less rain and less cloud cover.7
In South America, the Andes mountain range blocks Pacific moisture that arrives in that continent, resulting in a desertlike climate just downwind across western Argentina.8 The Sierra Nevada range creates the same effect in North America forming the Great Basin desert,9 Mojave Desert and Sonoran Desert.
Effective rainfall
Effective rainfall is defined as that part of the precipitation that reaches stream and river channels as direct runoff (as opposed to that which is intercepted by vegetation or lost as evaporation).10
See also

Weather
Flood
Cyclone
High pressure area

References


The Three Types of Rainfall
BBC - GCSE Bitesize - Geography | Weather | Types of rainfall
GCSE Geography&gt; Water&gt; Rainfall


Category:Precipitation Category:Weather



↩
B. Geerts. Convective and stratiform rainfall in the tropics. Retrieved on 2007-11-27.↩
↩
Glossary of Meteorology. Graupel. Retrieved on 2009-01-02.↩
Physical Geography. CHAPTER 8: Introduction to the Hydrosphere (e). Cloud Formation Processes. Retrieved on 2009-01-01.↩
Diana Leone. Rain supreme. Retrieved on 2008-03-19.↩
Western Regional Climate Center. Climate of Hawaii. Retrieved on 2008-03-19.↩
Paul E. Lydolph. The Climate of the Earth. Retrieved on 2009-01-02.↩
Michael A. Mares. Encyclopedia of Deserts. Retrieved on 2009-01-02.↩
Glossary of Meteorology. Effective precipitation. Retrieved on 2009-01-02.↩


