
Fairfax Harrison (March 13, 1869 &lt;U+2013&gt; February 2, 1938) was an American businessman and writer. The son of the secretary to the Confederate President, Harrison studied law at Yale University and Columbia University before becoming a lawyer for the Southern Railway Company in 1896. By 1906 he was vice president of finance of Southern Railway and, in 1907, helped secure funding that kept the railway solvent. In 1913 he was elected president of Southern, where he instituted a number of reforms in the operations of the company.
During World War I, Harrison helped to expand the railway during the period before the United States joined the war. After the federal government took over the railroads in December 1917, he served on the governmental panel that administered the American railways. After the war, an economic boom helped expand the company and Harrison worked to improve the railroad's public relations as well as the pulling capacity of the locomotives. Another concern was increasing the amount of railroad tracks and the extent of service for the railway.
After the start of the Great Depression, Harrison struggled to keep the railroad afloat and, by 1936, the Southern was once more showing a profit. In 1937, Harrison retired, hoping to continue to work on his hobby of writing about historical subjects, including the roots of the American Thoroughbred horse, but he died in December 1938, three months after his retirement.
Background and early life
Harrison was the son of Burton Harrison and Constance Cary Harrison.1 Burton had served as secretary for Jefferson Davis during the American Civil War, while Constance was a novelist.2 Fairfax was born in New York City on March 13, 1869 and was the brother of Francis Burton Harrison. Fairfax attended Yale University and graduated in 1890 with a bachelors, going on to attend Columbia University and earning a Masters in Arts.3
Railroad career
Early career
Harrison joined the Southern Railway Company in May 1896 as a lawyer, later becoming an assistant to the company's president in 1903 and Vice-President in 1906.4 He served as vice-president in charge of finance and accounting.5 In 1907, during that year's financial panic, Harrison successfully persuaded J. P. Morgan to purchase bonds in the Southern Railway in order to keep the railway solvent.6 After the panic had subsided, Harrison was named president of the Chicago, Indianapolis and Louisville Railway, later the Monon Railroad, which was jointly owned by Southern and the Louisville &amp; Nashville Railroad.7 On November 23, 1913, William Finley, the president of the Southern Railway died, and Harrison was elected as his successor on December 1, 1913.8 His election was considered to be a sign of change in the Southern United States, especially in its railroads.9
First years as president
One of Harrison's first acts as president was to implement a new training program for college graduates hired at the company. They were employed not in supervisory roles at first, but were placed in regular entry-level jobs in the engine shops and out on the building and repairing of railroad track. This was designed to give the newly hired college graduates an understanding of the basics of the railroad business. Besides this program for possible future managers, he also instituted a remedial education program for the regular workmen. This trained them in mathematics and other high school-level courses as well as in engine and machine shop basics. This program was designed to help train new supervisors in the skills they would need to manage other workers.10
Another of Harrison's goals was to raise the morale of the workmen and locomotive engineers. As part of those efforts, locomotive crews were assigned to the same locomotives and engineers with seniority were allowed to paint their names on their engines. When business declined in 1914, he reduced his own salary by 20% but made all other salary cuts smaller, with the smallest percentages in the lowest pay scales. Other efforts to improve morale included rewards for fuel efficiency and efforts towards improving safety, including the stricter investigation of accidents.11
Harrison also oversaw the overhaul of the railway's Board of Directors. Prior to 1915 most of the members of the board were from the northern United States but, after 1915, a majority of the board members were southerners. Also significant was the election in 1914 of two unusual men to the board — Edwin Alderman and John Kilgo. Alderman was the president of the University of Virginia and Kilgo was a bishop in the Methodist Episcopal Church.12
Harrison established a foreign trade department for the railroad, hoping to take advantage of the railway's ability to connect to the Mississippi Valley as well as Atlantic and Gulf of Mexico ports.13 In 1915, while the railway lost 12 percent of its revenue due to disruptions in trade from the start of World War I, Harrison warned the stockholders that automobile ownership could severely impact railroad passenger revenues.14
World War I
 From 1913 to 1919, Harrison oversaw the extension of double-track on the railway's mainline between Washington and Atlanta. This effort was hampered by the war effort, but eventually covered the complete  distance between the two cities. In 1916, Harrison acquired a railroad line that ran from Meridian, Mississippi to New Orleans. This brought Southern Railway's track total to over , covering 13 states. After the United States entered World War I in April 1917, a number of training camps were located in the south and much of the construction material used to create the new establishments was hauled over the Southern Railway. Harrison himself was elected chairman of a coordinating committee of railroad presidents, the War Board. This board was five members and its job was to eliminate bottlenecks and allow cooperation between the various railroads.15
These efforts, however, were not enough and, in December 1917, Woodrow Wilson, the President of the United States, ordered the federal government to take control of the railroads, setting up a United States Railroad Administration (USRA) to run them. Harrison worked for the USRA during the war and, under its regulations, was required to step down as chairman of the Southern Railway while serving the USRA. By the time the USRA returned control of the Southern over to the company in March 1920, the company's treasury was bare. A few years of operation returned a surplus to the company, which led to the stockholders requesting in 1923 that the railroad pay a dividend to the holders of the common stock, something that Southern had never done before. Harrison managed to defeat the attempt but, in March 1924, another attempt was successful, with a declared dividend of $5 (approximately $ as of ) per share. This was increased to $7 (approximately $ as of ) per share in 1926 and $8 (approximately $ as of ) in 1928.16
1920s
 An economic boom hit the South after the end of World War I, which greatly increased Southern's revenues. Harrison spent a good deal of time traveling around the southern United States, endeavoring to increase southern industry. When he traveled, he used two private railroad cars, which were named the Carolina and the Virginia. Most railroad presidents only used one, which made Harrison's practice unique. The Carolina was a sleeping car and the Virginia was set up to serve members of the Board of Directors, with a kitchen, dining room, and observation area.17
Harrison also made efforts to increase the power of Southern's locomotives. In 1925, engineers under his direction created the plans for a class of locomotives called the Pacific P-4, which became famous and symbols of the Southern Railway. Harrison had seen in England the paint scheme used by the London &amp; Northeastern Line, which used green-painted engines. Returning home in 1925, he ordered the newly delivered Pacifics painted a forest green, which he called Virginia, with gold lettering and silver trim. The roof of each engine was painted brick red. These engines pulled the newly refurbished passenger trains that Harrison had begun work on before the war. He also instituted new passenger lines. In 1921 the Suwannee River Special began to run between Chicago, Detroit, and Cleveland down to Tampa and St. Petersburg in Florida. The Crescent Limited began service in 1925 between New Orleans and New York, with a scheduled time for the one-way trip of 37 hours and 50 minutes.18
Harrison continued the public relations and advertising efforts of his predecessors and, in 1924, an advertising campaign was launched with the slogan of &quot;The Southern Serves the South&quot;, which soon became well-known. Harrison himself toured the southern United States giving speeches about southern industry as well as about the railway.19 Harrison also spent long hours in negotiations to secure the legal foundations of the railway, which consolidated the railroad's debt and acquired majority control of some of the smaller lines that made up the railway.20
In 1926 the United States government forced the railroad to move out of its headquarters on Pennsylvania Avenue in Washington, D.C. Although Harrison threatened to take the company headquarters to Atlanta, in the end a new headquarters building was built on McPherson Square. Harrison installed a private lobby entrance leading to a private elevator to the 10th and 11th floors.21 The railroad took occupancy of the building in the early fall of 1929.22
During these years, Harrison showed a number of personality quirks that became legendary. One of these was his habit of calling in subordinates to dine with him in the executive dining room by sending them a blue chip that had the meal's conversational topic written upon it. Usually these topics were intellectual rather than related to the running of the railroad. Another oddity was that he refused to use his railroad pass, which entitled him to free passenger trips on the railroad. Instead, he personally paid for his railroad commute between his home and the railroad's offices.23
Great Depression
Before the Wall Street Crash of 1929, Southern's stock had sold for around $146 (approximately $ as of ), with an all-time high of just over $151 (approximately $ as of ).24 In 1932, the stock hit a low of $2.50 (approximately $ as of ) a share.25 In 1929 Southern's freight traffic had been 8.4 billion ton-miles, but it fell to 4.4 billion ton-miles in 1932. Southern's debt rose and it was only by slim margins that the company did not enter bankruptcy in 1932. Harrison ordered the halting of dividends in 1932 and many employees took pay cuts. Further efforts included a complete check of all expenses, with every item being subjected to scrutiny to see what could be eliminated.26 It was not until 1936 that the railroad again showed a profit, but this marked the turning point for the company in dealing with the Great Depression.27
In 1937 Harrison chose not to be reappointed as president and nominated as his successor Ernest Norris.28 Harrison, who was 68 at the time, planned to work on his historical works but he died three months after his retirement.29
Writing career
Harrison was also an author, writing on Virginia history and genealogy. Among his works were a translation of the agricultural works of Marcus Porcius Cato and a number of books on the local history of Virginia, including The Landmarks of Old Prince William,30 Devon Carys, Proprietors of the Northern Neck and Virginia Carys.31 He also wrote on the early history of the American Thoroughbred racehorse and his writings included The Belair Stud, The Roanoke Stud, The Background of the American Stud Book, and Early American Turf Stock.32 His research on American Thoroughbred origins caused him to be described by Peter Willet, a later writer on Thoroughbreds, as an &quot;indefatigable researcher in American pedigrees&quot;.33 Harrison also served on the Executive Committee of the Virginia Historical Society.34
Family, death, and legacy
Harrison was married and had at least two daughters, Ursula and Constance.35 He died on February 2, 1938,36 of heart disease.37 Harrison was described as &quot;physically imposing&quot; and was grey-haired by the time he was in middle age.38 Harry DeButts, an employee and prot&lt;U+00E9&gt;g&lt;U+00E9&gt;, described him as &quot;a little cold when you first met him, but underneath he was a very warm, admirable, capable and wise man&quot;.39
The College of William and Mary in Virginia holds a number of his papers in their collections.4041 A selection of his letters was published in 1944.42 The University of Virginia library also has on loan another collection of Harrison's papers.43 Correspondence and business files from his time as president of Southern Railway are held by the Southern Railway Historical Society in their collection of president's files. They were loaned to the Southern Civil War Museum in 2003 and were still there in 2008.44
On the day after Harrison's death, the New York Times carried his obituary, but a mix-up in the pictures occurred. Instead of a photograph of Harrison, the picture that ran with the obituary was of John Jeremiah Pelley, the president of the Association of American Railroads, who was still alive.45
Citations

References
















External links

Open Library listing of Harrison's works









Category:American railroad executives of the 20th century Category:Southern Railway (US) Category:1869 births Category:1938 deaths Category:American historians Category:Yale University alumni Category:Columbia University alumni




Davis Southern Railway p. 48↩
Swem Library Staff &quot;Harrison, Fairfax&quot; Special Collections Research Center College of William and Mary↩


Bryan &quot;Fairfax Harrison&quot; Virginia Historical Magazine pp. 153&lt;U+2013&gt;157↩
Davis Southern Railway p. 49↩
Davis Southern Railway pp. 51&lt;U+2013&gt;52↩

Davis Southern Railway pp. 53&lt;U+2013&gt;54↩

Davis Southern Railway p. 55↩

Davis Southern Railway p. 57↩
Davis Southern Railway pp. 58&lt;U+2013&gt;61↩

Davis Southern Railway, p. 62↩
Davis Southern Railway pp. 62&lt;U+2013&gt;64↩
Davis Southern Railway pp. 64&lt;U+2013&gt;65↩
Davis Southern Railway p. 66↩

Davis Southern Railway pp. 67&lt;U+2013&gt;68↩




Davis Southern Railway pp. 69&lt;U+2013&gt;70↩
Time Magazine Staff (November 1, 1937) &quot;South Server&quot; Time Magazine↩




Willet Classic Racehorse p. 107↩

Washington Times Staff (October 31, 1902) &quot;Day's Doings in World of Society: Weddings&quot; Washington Times↩

Time Magazine Staff (February 14, 1938) &quot;Milestones&quot; Time Magazine↩
Davis Southern Railway p. 53↩
Quoted in Davis Southern Railway p. 53↩

Swem Library Staff &quot;Fairfax Harrison Papers&quot; Special Collections Research Center College of William and Mary↩
Google Books &quot;A Selection of the Letters of Fairfax Harrison&quot; Google Books↩
University of Virginia Library Staff &quot;A Guide to the Fairfax Harrison Papers&quot; Special Collections University of Virginia Library↩
Southern Civil War Museum Staff &quot;Southern Railway Historical Association Collection of Southern Railway President&lt;U+2019&gt;s Files: Fairfax Harrison, 1931&quot; Southern Civil War Museum↩
Time Magazine Staff (February 14, 1938) &quot;Painful Pictures&quot; Time Magazine↩


