
Maria Owings Shriver (pronounced: ; born November 6, 1955)1 is an award-winning American journalist from the Kennedy Family, a prolific author and First Lady of California. Her husband is Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger.
Early life
Shriver was born in Chicago, Illinois. A Roman Catholic of Irish and German descent, she was the second child and only daughter of the politician Sargent Shriver and Eunice Kennedy Shriver; Eunice is the sister of the former President John F. Kennedy. She attended Westland Middle School in Bethesda, Maryland, a suburb of Washington, DC, and graduated with the class of 1973 from Stone Ridge School of the Sacred Heart in Bethesda, Maryland. Shriver received a B.A. degree in American Studies from Georgetown University in June 1977.
Career
In her book Ten Things I Wish I'd Known Before I Went Out Into The Real World, Shriver says that she became passionate about broadcast journalism after being sent to the back of the campaign plane with the press corps when volunteering for her father's vice presidential race, calling these orders &quot;the best thing that ever happened to me.&quot; After her journalism career began with KYW-TV in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, she co-anchored the CBS Morning News with Forrest Sawyer from 1985 until 1987, co-anchored Sunday Today and weekend editions of NBC Nightly News from 1987 until 1989, and was a contributing anchor on Dateline NBC from 1989 until 2004. In August 2003, Shriver took an unpaid leave of absence from NBC News when her husband became a candidate in the 2003 California recall.
Upon her husband's inauguration as the 38th Governor of California, she became the First Lady of California on November 17, 2003. She then returned to reporting, making two more appearances for Dateline NBC.
On February 3, 2004, Shriver was told by NBC she was to be &quot;relieved of [her] duties at NBC News,&quot; citing the conflict of interest between her role as a journalist and her status as the First Lady of California and her increasing role as an advocate of her husband's administration.
Shriver has played a minor role in Be Prepared, an episode of the television series That's So Raven as herself promoting a &quot;Preparedness Plan&quot;. She also appeared as herself in the film Last Action Hero. On March 23, 2007, Shriver returned to television news as substitute host of panel-discussion talk show Larry King Live on CNN. Shriver moderated a discussion of breast cancer and its effects with cancer specialist Dr. Susan Love, musician Sheryl Crow, and other guests.
Shriver announced that she will not return to news media after the excessive media coverage of the death of Anna Nicole Smith.23
Personal life
 In 1977, Tom Brokaw introduced Maria to Austrian bodybuilder and actor Arnold Schwarzenegger at a charity tennis tournament being held at Eunice Kennedy Shriver's home. She married Schwarzenegger on April 26, 1986 in Hyannis, Massachusetts at St. Francis Xavier Roman Catholic Church.4 They have four children: Katherine Eunice Schwarzenegger (born December 13, 1989 in Los Angeles, California); Christina Maria Aurelia Schwarzenegger (born July 23, 1991 in Los Angeles, California)5; Patrick Arnold Shriver Schwarzenegger (born September 18, 1993 in Los Angeles, California)6; and Christopher Sargent Shriver Schwarzenegger7 (born September 27, 1997 in Los Angeles, California)8
On Sundays, Shriver and her family attend mass at St. Monica's Catholic Church in Santa Monica, California.910 The Schwarzenegger-Shrivers live in their 11,000-square-foot home in Brentwood.1112 They used to own a home in the Pacific Palisades.13 The family owns vacation homes in Sun Valley, Idaho and Hyannis, Massachusetts.14
The Saint John's Health Center has a nursery named after Shriver.1516
On April 7, 2008, it was revealed that Shriver's medical records were breached at the UCLA Medical Center.1718
First Lady of California
 During her husband's tenure as the Governor of California, Shriver was initially tentative in her role as the Governor's wife. Some speculated that she felt that her husband would not attempt to gain the Governor's seat in the recall election that drove Gray Davis from office. When Arnold announced his candidacy abruptly on the Tonight Show with Jay Leno, she played the part of the loyal political spouse. Since Governor Schwarzenegger took office, Maria has visibly supported her husband and has taken on several key initiatives as first lady - raising awareness of the contributions of women to the state, working on practical solutions to end cycles of poverty and encouraging all Californians to engage in acts of service to their communities. As her husband proposed a series of California ballot initiatives in November 2005, she decided to forgo any public support of her husband's proposals.
Prior to her work at NBC, Shriver had co-anchored the CBS Morning News. She has won Peabody and Emmy awards and is the author of six best-selling books: What's Heaven, Ten Things I Wish I'd Known Before I Went Out Into The Real World, What's Wrong with Timmy?, What's Happening to Grandpa?, And One More Thing Before You Go, and Just Who Will You Be?.
On February 3, 2008, Shriver endorsed the candidacy of Senator Barack Obama for the Democratic Presidential Nomination in 2008. It was done during a rally held at the University of California, Los Angeles featuring Caroline Kennedy, Oprah Winfrey, Stevie Wonder and the candidate's spouse, Michelle Obama.1920 Her husband had previously endorsed Senator John McCain for the Republican Presidential nomination a few days earlier on January 31, 2008.
Honors
A type of rose was named after Shriver in October 2004. The Maria Shriver rose has starchy-white blooms and a powerful citrus fragrance.21
Books







References

External links
Official

Official site of the First Lady of California
After School All Stars Board of Directors
Maria Shriver at the National Governors Association

Unofficial

A brief biography
Maria Shriver's campaign contributions












de:Maria Shriver es:Maria Shriver fr:Maria Shriver id:Maria Shriver lb:Maria Shriver pt:Maria Shriver fi:Maria Shriver sv:Maria Shriver zh:&lt;U+739B&gt;&lt;U+4E3D&gt;&lt;U+4E9A&gt;&lt;U+00B7&gt;&lt;U+5965&gt;&lt;U+56E0&gt;&lt;U+65AF&gt;&lt;U+00B7&gt;&lt;U+65BD&gt;&lt;U+83B1&gt;&lt;U+4F5B&gt;
Category:1955 births Category:American activists Category:American broadcast news analysts Category:American children's writers Category:American feminists Category:American journalists Category:American reporters and correspondents Category:American Roman Catholics Category:Americans of German descent Category:American television news anchors Category:Anti-poverty advocates Category:Arnold Schwarzenegger Category:California Democrats Category:California writers Category:Disability rights activists Category:Emmy Award winners Category:Female journalists Category:Georgetown University alumni Category:Irish-Americans Category:Irish-American writers Category:Kennedy family Category:Living people Category:NBC News Category:Peabody Award winners Category:People from Bethesda, Maryland Category:People from Chicago, Illinois Category:People from Los Angeles, California Category:People from Potomac, Maryland Category:Shriver family Category:Spouses of United States state governors



Shriver known for her political bloodlines (October 9, 2003) Sydney Morning Herald. Accessed 2008-02-05.↩
Maria Shriver won't return to NBC News. (October 24, 2007). USA Today. Accessed 2008-04-28.↩
Adam Tanner (May 16, 2007). Shriver says Anna Nicole frenzy ended her TV return. Reuters. Accessed 2008-04-28.↩
Maria Owings Shriver Wed To Arnold Schwarzenegger↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
Maria Shriver Ends Her Silence On Husband's Campaign - Vote News Story - KNBC Los Angeles↩
http://www.theinsideronline.com/celeb/2092/↩
Next Stop-Governor's Mansion? - Forbes.com↩
The Mind Behind the Muscles - Printout - TIME↩
Schwarzenegger, Shriver selling home in Palisades↩
↩
Saint John's Health Center - The Maria Shriver Nursery↩
Access Hollywood↩
More UCLA records abuses↩
Celeb Records Snooped in California↩
Maria Shriver Backs Obama↩
Breaking: California First Lady Maria Shriver Endorses Barack Obama↩
Rose named in honor of Maria Shriver↩


