
Tumbleweeds is a 1925 Western film starring and produced by William S. Hart. It depicts the Cherokee Strip land rush of 1893. The film is said to have influenced the Oscar-winning 1931 Western Cimarron, which also depicts the land rush.1 The 1939 Astor Pictures' re-release of Tumbleweeds includes an 8-minute introduction by the then 75 year old Hart as he talks about his career and the &quot;glories of the old west.&quot;2 Tumbleweeds was Hart's last movie.3
Background
In the Cherokee Strip of Oklahoma during the 1880's and early 1890's, the government lands that were leased to cattlemen were opened to settlement by homesteaders. To allow a fair chance for everyone, the prospective homesteaders were required to register and registrants were prohibited from entering into the Strip before the appointed time. Those who tried to get there beforehand were called &quot;Sooners&quot;. Hence the nickname of Oklahoma is the Sooner State. When a cannon shot signaled the start of the land rush, a hundred thousand men and women tried to stake their claims.
Plot
Set in Caldwell, Kansas on the Kansas-Oklahoma border, the movie features cowboy Don Carver (Hart) as a &quot;tumbleweed&quot; (i.e., a drifter) who decides to settle down after falling in love with Molly Lassiter (Barbara Bedford). Carver decides to get in on the Cherokee Strip land rush but when he's arrested and parted from his new love, he's in danger of missing the big race. Lucien Littlefield plays a strong supporting role in the movie as Hart's comic sidekick and best friend.4
Reviews
Contemporary Reviews
Reviews at the time of its release praised Tumbleweeds as good entertainment. The New York Times reviewed the film in 1925 and wrote that Hart's performance emphasized &quot;righteousness, his mental dexterity and physical prowess&quot; in the role of Carver.5 &quot;Although much of Don Carver's accuracy in shooting and his turning up at the psychological moment is nothing but the camera's good work, it should be noted that Mr. Carver, impersonated by Mr. Hart, frequently won applause from the audience yesterday afternoon.&quot;6
A 1926 review of Tumbleweeds in Photoplay Magazine says &quot;Bill Hart returns to the screen in a story laid in the time when the Indian territory was turned over to the homesteaders. The scene in which the prospective land owners, waiting for the cannon's boom which would send them racing in to stake their claims, furnished a brand new thrill...It is good entertainment.&quot;7
Modern Reviews
Modern reviews of Tumbleweeds have placed the movie as the high point of Hart's career and as a seminal film of the silent era that was unique for its era in its depiction of Native Americans and African Americans. Gary Johnson in Images Journal said that although Tumbleweeds was only a mild box-office success, it is arguably Hart's finest film.8 &quot;The movie's most impressive sequence remains the land rush&quot;, wrote Johnson.9 &quot;All manners of vehicles -- covered wagons, surreys, stagecoaches, even a large-wheeled bicycle -- bounce over the prairie in the mad rush to claim land. Other films would attempt to recreate the Oklahoma land rush -- such as Cimarron, which won the Best Picture Academy Award in 1931 -- but Tumbleweeds remains the best example.&quot;10
John Nesbitt wrote that Hart went out on a high note with Tumbleweeds.11 &quot;Tumbleweeds stands up remarkably well, and most film devotees will find it among the more interesting and entertaining melodramas of the silent era&quot;, wrote Nesbitt.12 Tammy Stone wrote that Hart was to Westerns what Chaplin was to comedy and that Hart managed to &quot;both stay in the game and go out with a bang&quot; in his last film Tumbleweeds.13 Hart's &quot;last film is widely considered to be his masterpiece, and also one of the seminal films of the silent era&quot;, she added.14 Michael W. Phillips Jr. wrote in 2007 that the movie was unique in movies of the era because it included Native Americans who weren't faceless villains but Hart's friends and included African Americans among the boomers of 1889.15 &quot;With Hart's retirement from film, another important phase ended: serious, mature Westerns disappeared, and it would take another 25 years for Howard Hawks, Anthony Mann, and John Ford to use the Western for more grown-up ends than simple cowboys and Indians.&quot;16
Hart's last movie
Tumbleweeds was Hart's last movie.17 In 1939, Astor Pictures re-released the film and provided an eight-minute introduction that would be Hart's last appearance on film.18 In this introduction, he states:

My friends, I loved the art of making motion pictures. It is as the breath of life to me ... the rush of the wind that cuts your face, the pounding hooves of the pursuing posse, and then the clouds of dust! Through the cloud of dust comes the faint voice of the director, &quot;Now, Bill, OK! Glad you made it! Great stuff, Bill, great stuff! And, say, Bill! Give old Fritz a pat on the nose for me, will ya?&quot; The saddle is empty, the boys up ahead are calling, they're waiting for you and me to help drive this last great round-up into eternity.&quot;19

Hart retired to his ranch in Newhall, California and although producers continued to offer him roles in sound films, he refused to return to the screen.20
Revival
 On September 14, 2007, Dennis James, a silent film musician, performed a score to Tumbleweeds in a live performance at the Poncan Theater in Ponca City, Oklahoma as a special commission as part of a celebration of the one-hundredth anniversary of Oklahoma statehood.21
Home media
On August 25, 2009, Alpha Video released the Astor Pictures' 1939 version of Tumbleweeds on Region 0 DVD.22
References

External links

Dennis James plays accompanies Tumbleweeds in Ponca City, Oklahoma September 14, 2007.



Category:1925 films Category:American silent films Category:Black and white films Category:1920s Western films Category:American films Category:Films set in Oklahoma Category:Films directed by actors








The New York Times. &quot;Tumbleweeds: The Screen; Clothes and Cosmetics&quot; (1925)↩
Photoplay Magazine. February, 1926.↩
Images Journal. &quot;30 Great Westerns: Tumbleweeds. Issue 10.↩



Rotten Tomatoes. &quot;Old School Reviews&quot; by John Nesbitt.↩

The Silent Collection. &quot;Williams S. Hart&quot;↩

Goatdog's Movies. &quot;Tumbleweeds.&quot; November 25, 2007.↩



Essortment. &quot;William S. Hart.&quot;↩
Carl Bennett, Dennis James on SilentEra.com. Accessed online 16 January 2006.↩
↩


