



See Junagarh for disambiguation.


Junagadh () is the headquarters of Junagadh district in the Indian state of Gujarat. The city is the 7th largest in Gujarat. The city is located at the foot of the Girnar hills, 355 km south west of state capital Gandhinagar and Ahmedabad. The city is in western India. Literally translated, Junagadh means &quot;Old Fort&quot;. It is also known as &quot;Sorath&quot;, the name of the earlier Princely State of Junagadh. After brief struggle between India and Pakistan Junagadh joined India on 9 November 1947. It was a part of Saurashtra state and later Bombay state. In 1960 after Maha Gujarat movement it became part of newly formed Gujarat state.
History
Mauryan dynasty
 An impressive fort, Uperkot, located on a plateau in the middle of town, was originally built during the Mauryan dynasty by Chandragupta in 319 BCE The fort remained in use until the 6th century, when it was covered over for 300 years, then rediscovered in 976 CE The fort was besieged 16 times over an 800-year period. One unsuccessful siege lasted twelve years.
An inscription with fourteen Edicts of Ashoka is found on a large boulder within 2 km of Uperkot Fort.1 The inscriptions carry Brahmi script in a language similar to Pali and date back to 250 BCE On the same rock are inscriptions in Sanskrit added around 150 CE by Mahakshatrap Rudradaman I, the Saka (Scythian) ruler of Malwa, a member of the Western Kshatrapas dynasty.2 Another inscription dates from about 450 CE and refers to Skandagupta, the last Gupta emperor. Old rock-cut Buddhist &quot;caves&quot; in this area, dating from well before 500 CE, have stone carvings and floral work. There are also the Khapra Kodia Caves north of the fort, and the Babupyana Caves south of the fort.
The Maitraka dynasty ruled Gujarat in western India from 475 to 767 CE The founder of the dynasty, general Bhatarka, a military governor of Saurashtra peninsula under the Gupta empire, established himself as the independent ruler of Gujarat approximately in the last quarter of the 5th century. However, James Tod states Maitraka rule ended as early as 524 CE.3
Solanki dynasty
The Solanki, of the Chalukya dynasty, ruled Gujarat in the 11th and 12th centuries. The two large step wells (vavs) of Uperkot Fort were both commissioned by Rah Navghan I (1025-1044 CE)Muslims conquered Gujarat in 1299 and the Sultanate of Gujarat was formed in 1407. Mahmud Begada (Mahmud Shah I) invaded Junagadh in 1467. The city was annexed to the Gujarat Sultanate; the city foundation was laid for Mahmudabad in 1497. Strong embankments were raised along the river, and the city was adorned with a palace, handsome buildings and extensive gardens. When the Portuguese took over the ports of Diu and Daman in the 16th century, a fifteen-foot cannon, made in Egypt in 1531, was abandoned at Uperkot Fort by a Turkish admiral opposing the Portuguese forces at Diu.
Mughal rule
 Mohammad Bahadur Khanji I , who owed allegiance to the Sultan of Ahmedabad, founded the state of Junagadh by expelling the Mughal governor and declaring independence in 1748. Mohammad Bahadur Khanji I, who assumed the name &quot;Zaid Khan&quot; when he came to power in Junagadh, was the founder of the Babi dynasty. His descendants, the Babi Nawabs of Junagadh, conquered large territories in southern Saurashtra and ruled over the state for the next two centuries, first as tributaries of Baroda, and later under the suzerainty of the British. Nawabs of Babi dynasty:

1735 - 1758 : Mohammad Bahadur Khanji I4
1758 - 1775 : Mohammad Mahabat Khanji I
1775 - 1811 : Mohammad Hamid Khanji I
1811 - 1840 : Mohammad Bahadur Khanji II
1840 - 1851 : Mohammad Hamid Khanji II
1851 - 1882 : Mohammad Mahabat Khanji II
1882 - 1892 : Mohammad Bahadur Khanji III
1892 - 1911 : Mohammad Rasul Khanji
1911 - 1948 : Mohammad Mahabat Khanji III

Image:Mahabat Khan, the Nawab of Junagarh, 1870s.jpg|Mohammad Mahabat Khanji II, the Nawab of Junagarh, with young, Mohammad Bahadur Khanji III. 1870s. Image:Bahadur Khanji III, Nawab of Junagadh, and state officials, 1880s.jpg|Bahadur Khanji III (r. 1882-1892), Nawab of Junagadh, and state officials, 1880s. Image:Mohammad Rasul Khanji, Nawab of Junagadh, Bahaduddinbhai Hasainbhai, Wazier, Junagadh, 1890s.jpg|Mohammad Rasul Khanji, Nawab of Junagadh, Bahaduddinbhai Hasainbhai, Wazier, Junagadh, 1890s.
British period
 In 1748 Junagadh state founded. In 1807 it becomes British protectorate. The East India Company took control of the state by 1818, but the Saurashtra area never came under the direct administration of British India. Instead, the British divided the territory into more than one hundred princely states, which remained in existence until 1947. The present old town, developed during the 19th and 20th centuries, is one of the former princely states which were outside but under the suzerainty of British India.
The Shri Swaminarayan Mandir, Junagadh was constructed on the land presented by Jinabhai (Hemantsingh) Darbar of Panchala, and dedicated on Friday, 1 May 1828 A.D.
Accession of Junagadh to India

During the period spanning the independence and partition of India and Pakistan in 1947, the 562 princely states that had existed outside British India under British suzerainty were given a choice of acceding to either India or Pakistan or remaining outside them. Although the states were theoretically free to choose, Earl Mountbatten stated that &quot;geographic compulsions&quot; meant that most of them would choose India. Mountbatten took the position that only states that shared a common border with Pakistan should choose to accede to it, but he had no power to impose this point of view on the states.

15 Aug 1947 Accedes to Pakistan.
15 Sep 1947 Accession to Pakistan accepted.
9 Nov 1947 Occupied by India.
10 Nov 1947 Rescinds accession to Pakistan, accedes to India
24 Feb 1948 Referendum approves accession to India.
25 Feb 1948 Accession to India in effect.

On September 15, 1947, Nawab Mohammad Mahabat Khanji III of Junagadh, a princely state located on the south-western end of Gujarat and having no common border with Pakistan, chose to accede to Pakistan ignoring Mountbatten's views, arguing that Junagadh adjoined Pakistan by sea. The rulers of two states that were subject to the suzerainty of Junagadh — Mangrol and Babariawad — reacted by declaring their independence from Junagadh and acceding to India. In response, the nawab of Junagadh militarily occupied the two states. Rulers of the other neighbouring states reacted angrily, sending troops to the Junagadh frontier, and appealed to the Government of India for assistance. A group of Junagadhi people, led by Samaldas Gandhi, formed a government-in-exile, the Aarzi Hukumat (&quot;temporary government&quot;).5
India believed that if Junagadh was permitted to accede to Pakistan, communal tension already simmering in Gujarat would worsen, and refused to accept the Nawab's choice of accession. The government pointed out that the state was 96% Hindu, and called for a plebiscite to decide the question of accession. India cut off supplies of fuel and coal to Junagadh, severed air and postal links, sent troops to the frontier, and occupied the principalities of Mangrol and Babariawad that had acceded to India.6
Pakistan agreed to discuss a plebiscite, subject to the withdrawal of Indian troops, a condition India rejected. On 26 October, the Nawab and his family fled to Pakistan following clashes with Indian troops. Before leaving, the Nawab had emptied the state treasury of its cash and securities.
On 7 November, Junagadh's court, facing collapse, invited the Government of India to take over the State's administration. The Dewan of Junagadh, Sir Shah Nawaz Bhutto, the father of the more famous Zulfiqar Ali Bhutto, decided to invite the Government of India to intervene and wrote a letter to Mr. Buch, the Regional Commissioner of Saurashtra in the Government of India to this effect.7
The Government of Pakistan protested, saying that since the Nawab had chosen to accede to Pakistan, the Dewan had no authority to negotiate a settlement with India. Also, if India could acquire Kashmir (with an overwhelming Muslim majority) because its ruler had decided to accede to India, then Pakistan could claim Junagadh
The government of India rejected the protests of Pakistan and accepted the invitation of the Dewan to intervene.8 A plebiscite was conducted in February 1948,but it was not internationally monitored and Pakistan claims was not based on the plebiscite but on the logic of Kashmir Annexation, which went almost unanimously in favour of accession to India.9 Junagadh became a part of the Indian state of Saurashtra until 1 November 1956, when Saurashtra became part of Bombay state. In 1960, Bombay state was split into the linguistic states of Maharashtra and Gujarat, in which Junagadh was located.
Time Periods of Various Rulers



Various Rulers
Time Period{{cite web
url=http://www.nri.gujarat.gov.in/his-junagadh.htm
title=History of Junagadh
accessdate=22 June 2010}}




Maurya Dynasty ruled over Junagadh
in 319 BC





Kalinga Dynasty ruled over Junagadh
in 185 BC





Greek ruled over Junagadh
in 73-70 BC





Shaka(Scythians) ruled over Junagadh
100-275 AD





Kshatrapa ruled over Junagadh
276-455 AD





Gupta ruled over Junagadh
456-770 AD





The Chinese Traveller Hu-en-Tsang had visited Junagadh
640 AD





Chudasama / Chavada ruled over Junagadh
875-1472 AD





Muslim Rulers Mohammed Begada, Khalil Khan
1472-1572 AD





Mughals ruled over Junagadh
1573-1748 AD





Nawabs of Babi Dynasty(Yousufzai Pathan) ruled over
1749-1949 AD






Geography
 Junagadh is located at . It has an average elevation of 107 metres (351 ft).
Junagadh is situated at the foot of Mount Girnar. Junagadh has Arabian sea to its southwest, Porbandar to its north and Amreli to its east. Junagadh city is divided in to number of areas Main city is clustered around M.G. Road and Kalwa Chowk. Other areas are Gandhigram, Zanzarda Road, Talaw Darwaza, Bus-stand, Sakkar Baug, Timbawadi, Joshipara and Girnar Taleti. These areas comes under the administration of Junagadh Municipal Corporation.
Junagadh city has two rivers namesd Sonrakh and Kalwo. However Kalwo is facing major pollution problem because city sewers. Junagadh city has many lakes named Narsinh Mehta Sarovar, Damodarji, Sudarshan Lake etc. There are man made dams around Junagadh named Willingdon dam, Hasnapur Dam, Anandpur Weir. These are the main water sources for the city. Apart from that ground water supply is very widely available in the city so wells are scattered all across the city.
Junagadh city has pretty much similar soil as whole Junagadh district. It is Deep- Medium black coastal alluvium.10 It is because proximity of sea and long shore line and also because of the Girnar mountain ridge. Because of many fault lines in proximity Junagadh is in seismically active zone. Junagadh lies in Seismic Zone III region11 which means earthquake up to magnitude 6.5 on the Richter-scale may be expected.
Climate12
The diverse Junagadh weather is influenced by the semi arid conditions of the region. The Arabian Sea and the Gulf of Cambay are also influential factors affecting the climate and weather of Junagadh. Junagadh faces adverse climatic conditions in the summer months with the temperature ranging from 28&lt;U+00B0&gt; Celsius to 38&lt;U+00B0&gt; Celsius. In the winter months, the temperature ranges from 10&lt;U+00B0&gt; Celsius to 25&lt;U+00B0&gt; Celsius. The city is drained by the south-west monsoon from June to September. It records a rainfall of 1000 to 1200 mm annually. Various factors such as its close proximity to the sea influence the weather of Junagadh. The latent winds from the sea affect the climatic conditions in the region. HIghest rainfall in a calender year was recorded back in 1983 and it was 2800 mm.13
Annual average of weather parameter during 200814



Total rainfall (rainy days)
1690.7 mm (71)


Maximum temperature
44.5 'C (21/05/2010)


Minimum temperature
7.4 'C (11/12/2010)


Wind speed (km/hrs)
5.6 kmph


Evaporation (mm)
5.5 mm


Bright sunshine (hrs)
6.8 hr/day


Onset of monsoon
3 June 2008


Withdrawal of monsoon
13 September 2008



Economy
Due to its mountainous region and forest reserves Junagadh lacks major industries or plants. However main earning sectors for Junagadh are Mineral based Cement industry, Agriculture based industry and Power sector. Presence of huge reserves of Limestone, makes the cement industry a thriving industry sector. Major crops produced in the district are wheat,oil seeds, cotton, mango, banana, onion and brinjal. Total production of Oilseeds in Junagadh in 2006-07 was 4,64,400 MT15 which was the highest in the state. Junagadh is the largest producer of Groundnut and Garlic in the State contributing 26% and 34% to total production respectively. Junagadh has Asia's largest Ground nut research laboratory. Mango and onions are produced in large quantities in the district.
Some of the large scale industry present in Junagadh are Agro Marine Exports, Creative Castings Ltd., Gujarat Dairy Development Corporation, Austin Engineering. With an investment of INR 4,000 crore (USD 975.6million), JSW Power Co. propose to set up coal based power plant at Simar in Junagadh16. The economy of Junagadh is mainly based on agriculture. With the new Government policy of biotechnology, Junagadh has been identified as one of the agriculture biotechnology zone. This will boost setting up of agro-biotech industries in the district.
Junagadh boasts of some of the best tourist destinations in the State so Tourism is definitely a progressing sector. The State Government has sanctioned the project for development of Circuit Tourism project at Junagadh.17
Civic Administration
Junagadh is developing along National highway 8D rapidly in the North. It is mainly industrial development. In the west development is mainly residential in Timbawadi area. In the South due to limestone mines and in the East due to Girnar forest reserve the development is limited. Junagadh is administered by Junagadh Municipal Corporation. JMC is mainly responsible for the infrastructure and civic needs for the city. The Mayor is usually chosen through indirect election by the elected corporators for the term of two and a half years.
The Municipal Commissioner is the chief Executive Officer and head of the executive arm of the Municipal Corporation. All executive powers are vested in the Municipal Commissioner who is an Indian Administrative Service (IAS) officer appointed by the state government. Although the Municipal Corporation is the legislative body that lays down policies for the governance of the city, it is the Commissioner who is responsible for the execution of the policies. The Commissioner is appointed for a fixed term as defined by state statute. The powers of the Commissioner are those provided by statute and those delegated by the Corporation or the Standing Committee.
The Collectors are in charge of property records and revenue collection for the Central Government, and oversee the national elections held in the city.
Junagadh city police is headed by S.P., who is an Indian Police Service(IPS) officer. Junagadh also comes under DIG of Police Junagadh range, who is also an IPS officer. Junagadh police comes under State Home Ministry. Junagadh is divided in to two divisions A and B, each headed by a Police Inspector. Junagadh Fire department is headed by an Officer cadre.
Junagadh is the seat for District Court of Junagadh, which exercises jurisdiction over Junagadh district.
Politics
Politics of Junagadh city has always been closely contested between Indian National Congress and Bharatiya Janta Party. Other national parties with limited activities are Bahujan Samaj Party,Communist Party of India,National Congress Party. Other state parties active in Junagadh is Mahagujarat Jant Party, Samata Party, Republic Party of India. Junagadh has 194,196 registered voters including 100,050 Male and 94,146 Female.
Junagadh has one state assembly constituencies. BJP has always been a strong party in this arena. BJP won this seat in 2007 election. Total number of voters participated were 118,888. BJP got 52.36% of votes and nearest competitor was INC with 26.32%.18 Election for the state assembly is held every 5 years.
Junagadh Municipal Corporation has 17 wards and total of 51 seats. In 2009 elections INC won on 26 seats, BJP won 21 seats, BSP won 3 seats and 1 went to Independent out of 51. Majority went to INC although all in all BJP got more votes which were 134,739 votes which were 45.62% of total, on the other end INC got 120,533 which were 40.81% of total.19 The Mayor, Deputy Mayor has terms of 2 and a half years.
Junagadh district has one seat for Parliament and it 7 has segments meaning 7 assembly constituencies under it. Till 80's it was INC stronghold but after that BJP has been on top. Currently it is hold by BJP. National elections held every 5 years.
Transport
Public Transport
Public Transport in Junagadh is limited to City Bus and Auto rickshaws. However the city is not that big in area and the fact that old city area is very congested, City bus service is available in most areas except some old city areas. City bus service runs through Public private partnership mode between Municipal Corporation and a private firm. Taxi service is very limited but they are available in numbers but mostly for intercity journeys. G.S.R.T.C. provides buses for transportation between cities and towns across the state and Junagadh is well connected by G.S.R.T.C..
Road
Junagadh is connected to Rajkot and Ahemadabad by National Highway 8D which also connects Junagadh to Veraval and Somnath. Junagadh city Bypass is developed for commuters traveling on National Highway 8D with other destinations then Junagadh and it is for time saving. In the south Junagadh is connected to Bilkha and Sasan Gir Lion Sanctuary. Kalwo river runs through Junagadh and Ferguson bridge is built over it to connect the two parts of the city. A bridge is also constructed on river Sonrakh in the northern outskirts of the city. Mount Girnar is connected with Junagadh by road. Rickshaws are generally preferred as mode of transportation.
Rail
Junagadh comes under Western Railway zone of Indian Railways. Junagadh is connected with Rajkot and Ahemadabad by trains. Many long distance trains mainly to the south India also connects Junagadh to southern India destinations. Trains also connects Mumbai, Bhopal, Pune, Delhi etc.
Air
Junagadh city itself does not have an airport due to mountainous terrain but air port is developed at Keshod which 40 km. from Junagadh. Direct flights for Mumbai can be availed from this air port. Other nearest air ports are Rajkot 99 km and Porbandar 113 km. Vayadoot Airline operates cheap flights from Mumbai to Rajkot and Keshod airport. Indian Airlines also operates scheduled flights to Mumbai from Rajkot. Gujarat Airways provides flights from Keshod to Mumbai and back on four days of the week. The airways provide regular flights to Mumbai from Rajkot.
From the Keshod and Rajkot Airport, there are several modes of conveyance that will take the tourists to Junagadh. Apart from the private travel agencies, the GSRTC also provides bus services, connecting Junagadh to the various air terminals.
Junagadh has a Heliport at Zafar Maidan in Gandhigram area. Regular flights were made in past for helicopter service provided on mount Girnar. Otherwise it is used for visiting V.I.P.
Sea
Junagadh district has a long shore line of 192 km in total. But Junagadh city is not on the shore line. The nearest sea port is Veraval and it is mainly used for commercial product exports and imports. Passenger ferries are very limited.
Utility Services
Junagadh city has population of 2.66 lakh and present water demand is 30 mld. Water is supplied through 25,000 tap connections by three major surface water sources namely Aanandpur Weir, Hasanapur dam &amp; Wellingdon dam and 32 nos. of wells. Junagadh city has more than 1000 nos. of Hand pumps and 200 nos. of stand posts as Ground Water Sources situated all over city area. Junagadh city area limit were extended in January-04 increasing its area from 13.47 km2. to 57 km2. Eight Nos. for Grampanchayats and One Municipality was merged in Junagadh city limit. Newly Merge area has its individual ground water supply system through bore wells.20
Daily generation of solid waste in city approximately 150 M.T. Thus the total waste is within the range of 400 gm per capital per day of domestic waste. the above solid waste is being collected by deploying 400 wheel barrows (six containers) as per the guidelines of Hon'ble supreme court by MSW rule 2000. JMC has setup 800 community bins for solid waste collection.21 It covers 90% of city area. Junagadh city's drainage system is 62 km long but it covers only 67% of total area and 60% of total population.22
Electricity is provided and distributed by P.G.V.C.L. which is a state run company. Telecom service is available in the city. It is provided by B.S.N.L. mainly. Reliance, Tata are other service providers. Cell phone coverage is extensive and main service providers are Vodafone Essar, B.S.N.L., Airtel, Idea Cellular and Tata Docomo. B.S.N.L. also provides broadband service.
City has a good network of street lights. There are total 12,545 Tube Lights and 1523 Central sodium lighting. Solar light project is also approved for the Narsinh Mehta Sarovar.23
Demographics
As of 2001 India census,24 Junagadh had a population of 168,686. Males constitute 52% of the population and females 48%. Junagadh has an average literacy rate of 73%, higher than the national average of 59.5%: male literacy is 77%, and female literacy is 67%. In Junagadh, 11% of the population is under 6 years of age. However in 2003 Junagadh has become 7th Municipal Corporation of the state and in 2004 new areas were included in Junagadh Municipal Corporation. Due to this the population of Junagadh city increased to 2,66,03825. The population projection in 2011 has been forecasted 4,80,000.
Sex Ratio according to 2011 census is around 955 which is more than state(886) and national average(914). Though the average sex ratio is higher but still this number shows a lot of work is to be done. Central and State both governments are working on this issue. There has been some improvement but still there is a long way to go.
People of Junagadh are also called Kathiyawadi in other parts of Gujarat as Junagadh is part of the Kathiyawad region which is also called Saurastra. Gujarati is the official language as Junagadh is part of Gujarat. Hindi, English and Sindhi are also spoken by some specific groups. Gujarati is spoken here in form of Sorathi Kathiyawadi dialect. Kathiyawadi dialect is Gujarati only but with some different words.
Junagadh is has relatively low to medium housing and land costs in comparison to cities like Rajkot. The city is rapidly expanding and available land inside the limits of Municipal Corporation are now limited. Total area under slums is 19.5 km2 (14.5% of total municipal area) and total slum population accounts for around 25% of total population.26
Number of migrants from other states in Junagadh city is limited around as industrial growth is limited. However migration from other districts in Junagadh and around the city is large as agriculture field is much developed. Total migrants are around 2.5% of total population. Tibetan migrants are notable among the migrants. Nepali community is also present in numbers. They are mainly Nepali Gurkha.
The religions represented in Junagadh includes Hindus, Muslims, Jains, Christians, Buddhists. Among these Hindus are majority and Muslims are the largest minority group. Jains and Christians are also in considerable numbers. Sikhs and Parsis are very few in numbers. There are Tibetan migrants who practice Buddhism. Main linguistic group is Gujarati. Other groups are Hindi, Sindhi. Small community of African origins known as siddis are also resides in and around Gir Sanctuary but some of them migrated to Junagadh city. There are around 881627 Siddi in the state and 65% of them resides in Junagadh.28
Culture
Culture of Junagadh has a blend of festivals, food and religions. The city is famous for it's type of food known as Kathiyawadi. Junagadh has limited night-life but people generally like to go for a drive. Girnar taleti area is favored by most of the population due to cool weather and peaceful atmosphere. Junagadh was ruled by Muslim Nawab before the independence because of that overall culture of Junagadh is blend of both Hindu and Muslim community. Parveen Babi arguably the most beautiful actress to feature in Hindi cinema was from Junagadh. Her father Vali Mohammed Babi, was an administrator with the Nawab of Junagadh.
Junagadh has number of theaters and Hindi cinema is very popular. Gujarati and English movies are also shown by various theaters. Various arts like Painting, Pottery, Woolen clothes etc. are also exhibited from time to time. Junagadh Agricultural University is host to various exhibitions like Agricultural Exhibitions and Fair, Farmers Day camp etc. in Sardar Smruti Kendra developed solely for this purpose. City police also organizes a weapons exhibition annually.
Junagadh has a very famous zoo named Sakkarbaug Zoological Garden known as Sakkarbaug Zoo established in 1863 in the area of around 200 hectors. The zoo provides purebred Asiatic lions for the Indian and the international endangered species captive breeding program for the critically endangered species. Currently, it is the only zoo in the country to hold African Cheetahs29. The zoo also has museum of natural history.
Located in the historic city of Junagadh in Gujarat, the Durbar Hall Museum is one of the most famous tourist attractions of Gujarat. The beautiful Durbar Hall was used as durbar (court) of the erstwhile Nawabs of Junagadh. The Durbar Hall has many interesting sections like Picture Gallery, Palanquin, Textile and Arms Gallery. The Durbar Hall Museum displays exciting collections of weapons and armor, belonging to the period of the Junagadh Nawabs along with other interesting curios and artifacts. The Museum also displays silver chains, chandeliers, settees, thrones, palanquins, howdahs, cushions, gowns and a large carpet that was woven in the Junagadh jail.30
Junagadh has witnessed rules of many famous dynasties like Babi Nawabs, Vilabhis, Kshatraps, Mauryas, Chudasamas, Gujarat Sultans and several others. It has also seen major religious upsurges. All these have greatly influenced the architectural developments of Junagadh. The Buddhist caves in Junagadh, with their intricately carved gateways, Chaitya halls, sculptured pillars and sanctums are classic examples of rock cut architectural style. The Chudama Rajputs have left specimens of their architectural style in Nabghan Kuvo and Adi Kadi Vav. Religious monuments like Jami Masjid remind us of the glorious Muslim architectural patterns. The Ashokan Edicts is a classic example of old rock engraving styles. The Maqbaras and numerous age-old palaces in Junagadh tell the story of its rich historical and architectural past.31
The people of Junagadh celebrate both western and Indian festivals. Diwali, Maha Shivratri, Holi,Janmastami, Muharram, Navratri, Christmas, Good Friday, Dussera, Moharram, Ganesh Chaturthi, are some of the popular festivals in the city.32
Shivratri Mela is organized at the foot of Mount Girnar (Talati) in the month of MAHA (9th day of the month of Maagha). The mela lasts for the next five days. About 500,000 people visits Junagadh on this occasion.33 Girnar Parikrama is also organized annually. It starts in the month of Kartik and draws 1 to 1.5 million people. People walk the periphery of the Girnar Hills on foot (about 32 km) to enjoy the religious and natural beauty.34 Apart from these religious and national festivals Junagadh also celebrates it's accession to India on 9 November 1947 annually and it is celebrated as independence day of the city.35 1 May is Gujarat day, to celebrate the formation of Gujarat state on 1 May 196036.
Media
Junagadh has several newspaper, television channels and a radio station. These newspapers and channels are in Gujarati and English languages only. Hindi newspapers has very limited readers in the city. There are several magazines also available in Gujarati language. Main Gujarati language newspapers are Gujarat Samachar, Divya Bhashkar, Sandesh, Akila, Saurashtra Bhoomi, Junagadh Today, Kesari Daily etc. Main English language newspapers available are The Times of India and The Indian Express. Financial Times is also read in limited numbers.
Numerous Indian and international television channels can be watched in the city through the local cable television provider or via D.T.H.. The national television broadcaster, Doordarshan, provides free terrestrial channels, while cable networks serve most households. The wide range of channels are available such as Star Plus, Sab TV, Sony TV etc., sports channel like ESPN, Star Sports, Neo Sports etc., educational channels like Discovery, National Geography etc. are also available. Local cable network provider also have their own local channels.
Junagadh has one FM radio station operated by government is available. All India radio broadcasting on AM frequency is also available. World Space radio is also available for paying customers.
Education
Schools in Junagadh are either &quot;municipal schools&quot; (run by the JMC) or private schools (run by trusts or individuals), which in some cases receive financial aid from the government. The schools are either affiliated with Gujarat Secondary and Higher Secondary Education Board(GSEB), Central Board of Secondary Education(CBSE) or International General Certificate of Secondary Education(IGCSE). English or Gujarati is the usual language of instruction. The government run public schools lack many facilities, but are the only option for poorer residents who cannot afford the more expensive private schools.
Under the 10+2+3/4 plan, students complete ten years of schooling and then enroll for two years in Higher Secondary, where they select one of three streams: arts, commerce, or science. This is followed by either a general degree course in a chosen field of study, or a professional degree course, such as law, engineering and medicine. Most of the colleges in Junagadh are either affiliated to Saurashtra University or Gujarat Technological University.
Junagadh has many colleges named Bahauddin Govt. Arts &amp; Science College(which is the largest college in Saurashtra region and was established in late 19th century)37, Commerce and law college, matru kesarben college for B.ed, Civil Hospital School of Nursing. Junagadh is also home to the Junagadh Agricultural University which offers courses in Agriculture engineering, fishery science and agricultural science. N.R. Vekariya college of business management studies, Noble engineering college, Vivek Bharti Trust Degree Pharmacy college, Junagadh Veterinary college are some of the other colleges.
SWAMI VIVEKANANDA VINAY MANDIR, JUNAGADH is one of the oldest secondary and higher secondary schools of Gujarat. Widely spread on a large land with a huge playground, gardens and contains oldish domes. The special thing about this school is, Dhirubhai Ambani studied here.38 Till date, Dhirubhai's birthday is widely celebrated with various cultural programs. Nowadays very famous for 11th and 12th standard (Science Stream).
Junagadh is home to the Directorate of Ground Nut Research which is Asia's largest ground nut research facility. Junagadh is home to the Regional Forensic Science Laboratory, Junagadh. It is the oldest forensic laboratory of Gujarat state39.
Junagadh also has Junagadh Police Training College run by Gujarat Police. They train young officers for Gujarat Police. In past they also trained police officers from Naxalite affected states.
Sports
Cricket is the most popular sport in the city. Cricket is played in various modified versions (generally referred to as gully cricket) are played everywhere. Junagadh is affiliated to Saurashtra Cricket Association40. The all time great batsman of Pakistan, Hanif Mohammad is of Junagadh.Junagadh had a first class level cricket stadium till 1973/74-Jaffar Maidan,where Ranji Trophy matches were played.But with time the ground became a grassland.From then the city hadn't a cricket ground.After nearly 4 decades now a domestic level cricket ground is being developed at Vivekanand School Ground,Junagadh41.
Various other sports such as football, basketball, volleyball etc. are also played. Many inter school and inter college tournaments are played annually and they are good platforms for the upcoming talents in athletics, swimming etc.
Junagadh has a swimming pool run by Junagadh Municipal Corporation. Junagadh agricultural university has a good ground and they host many tournaments.
Junagadh gymkhana was established before independence by Nawab of Junagadh. It has various sports facilities such as Indoor Badminton wooden court, several Tennis clay courts, Billiards room, Table tennis room, Carom and Chess room and a cards room. Gymkhana holds annual tournaments of Tennis, Badminton, Billiards and Teble Tennis. In summer they provide cricket coaching to young cricketers.
Junagadh also has Horse riding club run by Junagadh Police42. Police Training College in Junagadh organises various horses shows, many state police tournaments annually.
Places of interest

|thumb|right|200px|{upright}|2|Chhatri of Lord Swaminarayan's Charanavind on top of Swaminarayan temple


Somnath: Somnath is situated at Prabhaspatan in Junagadh District; 79 km away from Junagadh City and is the most sacred of the twelve Jyotirlings (lingas of light) of the God Shiva. Somnath means &quot;The Protector of Moon God&quot;. The Somnath Temple is known as 'the Shrine Eternal', as although the temple has been destroyed six times it has been rebuilt every single time. On the last time, it was built after a plan was mooted by Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel in November 1947, when he visited the area for Indian Integration of Junagadh, and later after his death carried out by K.M. Munshi, also a Minister in Government of India43.

 

GIRNAR The mountain, 6 km. from Junagadh city, has five principal peaks. It has roughly 8,000 steps. The third peak, Gorakhnath, at  above sea level, is the highest point of Gujarat state. UPERKOT certainly worth seeing Jain tamples. Spots to visit Bhimkund, Satpuda, Gaumukhi Ganga, Pathar chati, Bhairavjap, Bharatvan Sheshavan, Hanumandhara. The peak of Ambaji, with a height of , is famous for the temple of Ambaji. Kamandal kund; stepway diverts between temples of Gorakhnath and Dattatreya. The path to Dattatreya temple is difficult (photo gallery), but on the top of the peak is a small temple on the padukas of Guru Dattatreya.


ASHOK SHILALEKH:- About 2 km east of Junagadh and 3 km from the foot of Girnar Hill, between the two places, is an edict of Emperor Ashoka inscribed on a rock dating from the third century BC. The Ashokan edicts impart moral instructions on dharma, harmony, tolerance, and peace. An uneven rock, with a circumference of seven metres and a height of ten metres, bears inscriptions in Br&lt;U+0101&gt;hm&lt;U+012B&gt; script etched with an iron pen.44


SAKKARBAUG ZOO - This is the oldest zoo in Gujarat and the 3rd oldest in India. The rare Gir lions are bred and supplied to other zoos.


THE WILD MUSEUM - In the same premises as the zoo. Rare specimens of art furniture, stuffed animals, ancient coins, Persian Sanskrit inscriptions and various other articles of interest.

right270px|thumb|Bahauddin Makbara, mausoleum of the Wazir of Junagadh.

MAKABARA - Nawabs were buried here. This is a fine specimen of medieval structure.


NARSINH MEHTA NO CHORO - This place is said to be one where the great poet Saint and reformer Narsinh Mehta held his assemblies of discovers in 15th century. Some believe that Lord Krishna held a traditional &quot;Rasleela&quot; dance for his devotee Narsinh Mehta.


UPERKOT - Uperkot is an impressive fort located on a plateau in the middle of town. It was originally built in 319 BC. Visitors enter the fort through a large gate. Some parts of the fort&lt;U+2019&gt;s walls are 20 m high. If, after entering the gate you turn left, you will come to Jama Masjid. It has 140 pillars supporting its ceiling.

Further down the road are what are believed to be old Buddhist caves, said to be 1,500 years old (dating from before 500 AD). They are carved into the rocky hill and have stone carvings and floral work. There are also the Khapra Kodia caves north of the fort, and the Babupyana caves south of the fort.
There is a huge, fifteen-foot cannon, made in Egypt in 1531. There are also two interesting large step wells (vavs) here. The 11th century Navghan Kuva has a circular stairway that descends over 50 m down into the well. The Adi Chadi Vav descends 170 steps.



DARBAR HALL MUSEUM - Picture gallery, textiles, arms gallery, the kacheri, the hall which was used by Nawabs of Junagadh to hold their darbar. The Durbar Hall and Museum has an interesting collection of weapons, thrones, silver articles, costumes, paintings, tapestries, and palanquins on display. It is not far from the entrance to the fort.


GAYATRI MANDIR &amp; VAGHESHWARI MANDIR - On the way to Girnar Talati, are both of the beautiful temples of Maa Gayatri and Maa Vagheshwari. At every navratris, a mela is held.


SONAPUR - It serves as a cemetery but apart from that it has many temples and Sai Baba temple is most famous among them.


DAMODAR KUND - Built in 500 a.d., this often reconstructed kund (water reservoir) is a check dam. This kund is about a km before the bottom of Girnar Hill. It is a sacred bathing tank. Close to Damodara Kund is Revati Kund. It is said that Revata left Dwarka and moved near Girnar Hill after his daughter, Revati, married Lord Balarama.


DAMODARJI TEMPLE Near Aswatthama Hill, which is north of Damodara Kund, is the Damodarji Temple, said to have been built by Vajranabha, Lord Krishna&lt;U+2019&gt;s great-grandson.


DATAAR HILLS -  high stepway is built for going up shrine of Jamiyalshah Datar.


SCIENCE MUSEUM - Gujarat&lt;U+2019&gt;s first and the only private science museum. More than 60 working science projects based on science facts. Which can be operated by visitors. Worth visiting attached one small aquarium and evening open air garden restaurant garden caf&lt;U+00E9&gt; serves south Indian and Punjabi dishes since 198145.


WELLINGTON DAM - The dam is built on the river Kalwa at the foot of the hill from where it originates. It was built as a reservoir for drinking water for the people of Junagadh. It was named after Lord Willingdon, the then Governor of India. The three sides and a garden in front it affords an enchanting view46.


MOTI BAUG - The best garden the campus of agricultural university and botanical garden. It also houses the Junagadh Agricultural University Campus which has total land area of 754.62 ha and 2485 ha including 17 sub centers and 1500 manpower with annual budget around 28.5 crores. Having very nice pari talao.


Mujkund Caves - Famous place where Krishna ran and came from Mathura after which he was named as Ranchod Rai47.


Ayurvedic Museum- Ayurvedic Museum is located at the Ayurvedic College at Sardarbag in the western part of town. The personnel are helpful to those interested in learning something about this ancient and natural medical treatment.


NARSINH MAHETA LAKE- A beautiful lake constructed by joint effort of the people of Junagadh near Talav Gate.


BAHAUDDIN COLLEGE(Arts &amp; Science)- Gujarat's first science college built by the Nawab's vazeer &quot;Bahauddin&quot; who was brother in law of Nawab.


BEHT - Bhagvatinandji Education and Health Trust [See http://www.beht.org] has been working in the many places of Gujarat, and is well known for its work in Junagadh since many decades. In junagadh dist, BEHT has boarding school of 1200 capacity in Champarda, an educational institute for girls in Junagadh itself.


KESAR KERI (MANGOES)- Junagadh is famous for Kesar Mangoes (Safaron Mangoes). As name says Kesar mangoes are very sweet and looks like safaron color.


Shri Swaminarayan Mandir, Junagadh - Mandir made by BAPS.

See also

Asiatic Lion
Girnar
Gir Forest National Park
Indian Integration of Junagadh
Parveen Babi
Siddis
Shree Swaminarayan Mandir Junagadh

References

External links


Junagadh Agricultural University
Photo galleries 1280x960 of Junagadh &amp; trekkings to Girnar hill, on author's website
Shree RadhaDamodarji&lt;U+2019&gt;s Main Temple,Damodar Kund,Junagadh



ca:Junagarh (ciutat) de:Junagadh fr:Jun&lt;U+00E2&gt;gadh gu:&lt;U+0A9C&gt;&lt;U+0AC1&gt;&lt;U+0AA8&gt;&lt;U+0ABE&gt;&lt;U+0A97&gt;&lt;U+0AA2&gt; hi:&lt;U+091C&gt;&lt;U+0942&gt;&lt;U+0928&gt;&lt;U+093E&gt;&lt;U+0917&gt;&lt;U+0922&gt;&lt;U+093C&gt; bpy:&lt;U+099C&gt;&lt;U+09C2&gt;&lt;U+09A8&gt;&lt;U+09BE&gt;&lt;U+0997&gt;&lt;U+09A2&gt; it:Junagadh pam:Junagadh nl:Junagadh new:&lt;U+091C&gt;&lt;U+0941&gt;&lt;U+0928&gt;&lt;U+093E&gt;&lt;U+0917&gt;&lt;U+0922&gt; no:Junagadh pl:D&lt;U+017A&gt;unagadh simple:Junagarh sv:Junagadh te:&lt;U+0C1C&gt;&lt;U+0C41&gt;&lt;U+0C28&gt;&lt;U+0C3E&gt;&lt;U+0C17&gt;&lt;U+0C22&gt;&lt;U+0C4D&gt; vi:Junagadh war:Junagadh
Category:Disputed territories Category:Indian Princely States Category:Muslim princely states of India Category:Junagadh Category:Swaminarayan sect of Hinduism



[http://books.google.com/books?id=rs0ThKx9MHoC&amp;printsec=titlepage&amp;dq=junagadh#PPA36, M1 Ranchodji Amarji, T&lt;U+00E2&gt;rikh-i-Sora&lt;U+1E6D&gt;h: A History of the Provinces of Sora&lt;U+1E6D&gt;h and H&lt;U+00E2&gt;l&lt;U+00E2&gt;r in K&lt;U+00E2&gt;thi&lt;U+00E2&gt;w&lt;U+00E2&gt;d, pp. 36-46, Trubner &amp; Co. (1882) - translation of the edicts.]↩
&quot;Junagadh Rock Inscription of Rudradaman&quot;, Project South Asia.↩
James Tod, Annals and Antiquities of Rajasthan, vol. I (2002), pp. 177, 187.↩
Nawabs of Junagadh British Library.↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩

↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩


