 &quot;The Open Boat&quot; is a short story by American author Stephen Crane (1871&lt;U+2013&gt;1900). First published in 1897, it was based on Crane's experience of having survived a shipwreck off the coast of Florida. During a trip to Cuba to work as a newspaper correspondent, Crane was stranded at sea for thirty hours after his ship, the SS Commodore, sank after hitting a sandbar. Crane and three other men were forced to navigate their way to shore in a small boat. One of the men drowned while trying to swim to shore. Crane's personal account of the shipwreck and his survival was first published a few days after his rescue. After adapting his report into narrative form, the short story &quot;The Open Boat&quot; was published later that year in Scribner's Magazine.
A volume titled The Open Boat and Other Tales of Adventure containing the story and others was published in the United States in 1898. Although considered an innovative success by several contemporary critics, the book sold poorly. The story, which is considered an exemplary work of literary Realism, is now one of the most frequently discussed works in Crane's canon. H. G. Wells considered &quot;The Open Boat&quot; to be &quot;beyond all question, the crown of all his work&quot;.
Background
 Hired to serve as a war correspondent in Cuba during the Cuban insurrection against Spain, Crane boarded the SS Commodore on New Year's Eve, 1896. The ship sailed from Jacksonville, Florida with 27 or 28 men and a cargo of supplies and ammunition for the Cuban rebels.1 On the St. Johns River and less than  from Jacksonville, Commodore struck a sandbar in a dense fog and damaged its hull. Although towed off the sandbar the following day, it was again beached in Mayport and again damaged.2 A leak began in the boiler room that evening and as a result of malfunctioning water pumps, the ship came to a standstill about  from Mosquito Inlet. As the ship took on more water, Crane described the engine room as resembling &quot;a scene at this time taken from the middle kitchen of hades.&quot;3
Commodore's lifeboats were lowered in the early hours of the morning on January 2, 1897 and the ship ultimately sank at 7 a.m. Crane was one of the last to leave the ship in a  dinghy; he and three other men (including the ship's Captain) floundered off the coast of Florida for a day and a half before attempting to land their craft at Daytona Beach. The small boat, however, overturned in the surf, forcing the exhausted men to swim to shore; one of them, an oiler named Billie Higgins, died.4 Crane was reunited with his partner, Cora, several days after the ordeal.
The disaster was widely reported on the front pages of newspapers across the country. Rumors that the ship had been sabotaged were widely circulated but never substantiated.5
Plot summary

None of them knew the color of the sky. Their eyes glanced level, and were fastened upon the waves that swept toward them. These waves were of the hue of slate, save for the tops, which were of foaming white, and all of the men knew the colors of the sea. The horizon narrowed and widened, and dipped and rose, and at all times its edge was jagged with waves that seemed thrust up in points like rocks.6

&quot;The Open Boat&quot; is divided into seven sections, each of which is told mainly from the point of view of the correspondent, who is based upon Crane himself. The first part of the narrative introduces the four characters&lt;U+2014&gt;the correspondent, a condescending observer detached from the rest of the group; the captain, who is injured and morose at having lost his ship, yet a capable leader; the cook, who is fat and comical, but optimistic that they will be rescued; and the oiler, Billie Higgins, who is physically the strongest as well as the only one who is named throughout the story. The four have survived a shipwreck, which occurred before the beginning of the story, and are drifting at sea in a small dinghy.
In the following four sections, the moods of the men fluctuate from anger at their desperate situation and what they perceive to be a hostile sea, to a growing empathy for one another and the sudden realization that nature is not hostile, but indifferent. The dinghy is circled by a shark for some time, and the men battle fatigue and dehydration. When they see a lighthouse on the horizon, their hope is tempered with the realization of the dangerous circumstances of trying to reach it. Nevertheless, the oiler and the correspondent take turns rowing toward shore. The final chapter begins with the men's resolution to abandon the dinghy they have occupied for nearly two days and swim ashore. As they begin the long swim to the beach, the captain, the correspondent, and the cook swim roughly together, holding onto parts of the boat for support; the strongest of the four, the oiler, swims ahead alone. After three of the men safely reach the shore and are met by a group of concerned residents, they find Billie's body washed up on the beach.
Publication history
Crane's report of the incident appeared in the New York Press and other papers on January 7, 1897, only three days after his rescue. The account, which was titled &quot;Stephen Crane's Own Story&quot;, concentrated mainly on the fate of the Commodore and the chaos its crew is plunged into, rather than on the small, open boat that Crane and his three compatriots.7 The report caused a sensation and spurred the author to write a narrative version of the events.
The short story first appeared in the June 1897 issue of Scribner's Magazine. It was then published in the United States by Doubleday &amp; McClure in April 1898 as part of the book The Open Boat and Other Tales of Adventure, which included additional short stories by Crane such as &quot;The Bride Comes to Yellow Sky&quot;, &quot;Death and the Child&quot;, and &quot;The Wise Men&quot;. The English volume, which was published simultaneously with the American one, was titled The Open Boat and Other Stories and published by William Heinemann.8 Both editions included the subtitle &quot;A Tale Intended to Be after the Fact. Being the Experience of Four Men from the Sunk Steamer 'Commodore'&quot;, and were dedicated &quot;To the late William Higgins and to Captain Edward Murphy and Steward C. B. Montgomery of the Sunk Steamer Commodore&quot;.9
Style and themes
Although autobiographical in nature, &quot;The Open Boat&quot; is considered a work of fiction. Because of the work's philosophical speculations, it is often classified as a work of Naturalism, a literary offshoot of the Realist movement in literature.
&quot;The Open Boat&quot; features several important binaries, one of which is the struggle between man and nature. While the characters at first believe the turbulent sea to be a hostile force set against them, they come to believe that, perhaps not for the better, nature is instead ambivalent. At the beginning of the seventh and last section, the correspondent rethinks his previous assessment of nature's hostility: &quot;the serenity of nature amid the struggles of the individual—nature in the wind, and nature in the vision of men. She did not seem cruel to him, nor beneficent, nor treacherous, nor wise. But she was indifferent, flatly indifferent.&quot;10 Without both the condemnation and support of mother nature, the characters find solace in human solidarity.11 They are often referred to collectively as &quot;the men&quot;, rather than singularly, and there is also a silent understanding between them of their togetherness. The first few sentences of section three attest to this solidarity: &quot;It would be difficult to describe the subtle brotherhood of men that was here established on the seas. No one said that it was so. No one mentioned it. But it dwelt in the boat, and each man felt it warm him. They were a captain, an oiler, a cook, and a correspondent, and they were friends, friends in a more curiously iron-bound degree than may be common.&quot;12
In his 1990 book Sea-Brothers: The Tradition of American Sea Fiction from Moby-Dick to the Present, author Bert Bender noted Crane's sympathetic portrayal of the oiler Billie Higgins, the most physically able of the four characters, and yet the only one to perish. Bert wrote that Crane &quot;emphasizes that Bille's steady, simple labor is the tangible basis for his role here as a savior,&quot; and that the oiler's portrayal as a &quot;simple, working seaman, clearly expresses his sympathy with the democratic ideal of the sailor before the mast that figures so crucially in the tradition of American sea fiction.&quot;13 That Billie does not survive the ordeal, however, can be seen as an antithesis to Darwinism in that the only person to not survive was, in fact, the strongest.
Reception and legacy
Although &quot;The Open Boat&quot; received high praise from various critics and authors at the time of its first publication, the volume sold poorly. In defending the merit of the story and his friend's literary importance, journalist Harold Frederic wrote in his review for The New York Times that &quot;even if he had written nothing else, [&quot;The Open Boat&quot; would] have placed him where he now undoubtedly stands.&quot;14 Author and critic Elbert Hubbard wrote in Crane's obituary in the Philistine that &quot;The Open Boat&quot; was &quot;the sternest, creepiest bit of realism ever penned&quot;.15
Writing years after Crane's death, another of the author's friends, H. G. Wells, wrote that &quot;The Open Boat&quot; was &quot;beyond all question, the crown of all [Crane's] work.&quot;16 He continued: &quot;It has all the stark power of the earlier stories, with a new element of restraint; the color is as full and strong as ever, fuller and stronger, indeed; but those chromatic splashes that at times deafen and confuse in The Red Badge, those images that astonish rather than enlighten, are disciplined and controlled.&quot;17 Harry Esty Dounce similarly praised the story as chief among Crane's work, despite its seemingly simple plot, writing for the New York Evening Sun that &quot;those who have read &quot;The Open Boat&quot; will forget every technical feat of construction before they forget the long, heartbreaking mockery of the day, with land so near, the bailing, the egg-shell changes of seats, the terrible, steady cheerfulness and brotherhood of the queer little human group&quot;.18
After Crane's premature death from tuberculosis at the age of 28, his work and literary merit received a resurgence, and &quot;The Open Boat&quot; is now one of the most frequently discussed works in Crane's canon.
Notes

References

Bender, Bert. 1990. Sea-Brothers: The Tradition of American Sea Fiction from Moby-Dick to the Present. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1990.
Crane, Stephen. 1898. The Open Boat and Other Tales of Adventure. New York: Doubleday &amp; McClure Co.
Davis, Linda H. 1998. Badge of Courage: The Life of Stephen Crane. New York: Mifflin. ISBN 0899199348.
Dooley, Patrick K. 1994. The Pluralistic Philosophy of Stephen Crane. Urbana: University of Illinois Press. ISBN 0252019504.
Halliburton, David. 1989. The Color of the Sky: A Study of Stephen Crane. New York: Cambridge University Press. ISBN 0521362741.
Weatherford, Richard M. 1997. Stephen Crane: The Critical Heritage. New York: Routledge. ISBN 0415159369.
Wertheim, Stanley. 1997. A Stephen Crane Encyclopedia. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press. ISBN 0313296928.
Wertheim, Stanley and Paul Sorrentino. 1994. The Crane Log: A Documentary Life of Stephen Crane, 1871-1900. New York: G. K. Hall &amp; Co.. ISBN 0816172927.

External links

&quot;The Open Boat&quot; at Electronic Text Center, University of Virginia Library
Radio adaptation of &quot;The Open Boat&quot; on the CBS program Escape (1953)


it:La scialuppa
Category:Short stories by Stephen Crane Category:Florida in fiction Category:1897 short stories



Wertheim (1994), p. 232↩
Wertheim (1994), p. 233↩
Wertheim (1994), p. 234↩
Wertheim (1994), p. 236↩
Davis, p. 187↩
Crane, p. 3↩
Halliburton, p. 137↩
Wertheim (1997), p. 250–251↩
Crane, p. x↩
Crane, p. 52↩
Dooley, p. 68↩
Crane, p. 16↩
Bert, p. 69↩
Weatherford, p. 216↩
Weatherford, p. 265↩
Weatherford, p. 271↩

Current Opinion, Volume 62. Current Literature Pub. Co., 1917.↩


