

Andy (Andrew) Hayes (born 1977) is a published travel writer and travel industry entrepreneur, known internationally as that travel guy. His views on travel and the need for vacations as part of a healthy lifestyle have been featured in a number of publications, such as the Wall Street Journal 1, CNN 2, and the National Geographic Traveler 3 He is well regarded as an expert on online travel and a go-to resource for pairing travelers and ideal destinations; Finger Lakes Community College called him a &quot;young Internet star&quot; 4 and he is listed as one of the top 50 online influencers in travel5.
Life and career
In 2008, leaving behind a corporate career in the software industry, Hayes launched the first &quot;travel lifestyle magazine&quot; called Sharing Travel Experiences. 6. At the same time he launched a travel marketing consultancy, Travel Online Partners. 7. There he co-authored a book with Kelly Erickson called &quot;Why Your Website Sucks&quot;, currently the only guide to usability testing available for tourism organizations.
In the fall of 2009, he published the print guide, Historic Walking to Guide to Edinburgh. 8 which was later released in a mobile format onto the iPhone.
Hayes now runs a network of businesses under the brand Hayes Media Group, which include sites related to small business entrepreneurship, Christmas travel, travel website design, and other tourism-related products/services. He is often a featured speaker at tourism and technology conferences in both the United States, United Kingdom and elsewhere such as the Travel Blog Exchange and Blogworld9.
Personal life
Hayes was born in 1977 in the United States. He has lived in both Amsterdam as well as Edinburgh, Scotland. He currently resides in Seattle, Washington10.
He is a known to regularly practice yoga and meditation, as well as being a voracious reader, typically reading over 50 books a year.
Sources







External Links

Interview with Travel Writer/Consultant Extraordinaire, Interview at Jet Set Citizen, September 2009
Review of Historic Walking Guide to Edinburgh by Andy Hayes, Europe A La Carte, September 2009
Sailing the Someday Ship, Interview at Someday Syndrome, October 2009
Interview with Inspirational Travel Blogger, Interview at Business Backpacker, October 2009
Do What You Can Do and Leave the Rest Behind, Webinar Interview with Andy Hayes, July 2010
From humble beginnings to international travel entrepreneur, Interview at Budget Travel Intentions, August 2010
Presenting Yourself On the Web, Interview at The Writing Show, the web's largest writing podcast, August 2010
Starting a Resource Website, Interview at Gaebler
Podcast 168 - Things To Do In Edinburgh, Interview with Andy Hayes, Interview at Indie Travel Podcast, web's most popular travel podcast, September 2010
Review of Why Your Website Sucks by Andy Hayes and Kelly Erickson, ThePlanetD, Canada's Adventure Couple, September 2010
Review of Why Your Website Sucks by Andy Hayes and Kelly Erickson, Travel Writing Exchange, September 2010
Travel Blogs and the Elusive Audience, Review/mention of Why Your Website Sucks, September 2010
A Week in the Life of Andy Hayes, Interview at The Professional Hobo, November 2010
Editorial Features by Andy Hayes, Freelance Writing Jobs, Web's Largest Freelance Writing Community




Wall Street Journal FINS. Ten Signs Its Time to Leave Your Job, August 2010.↩
CNN Travel. Discover the Secrets of the Silk Road Before Everyone Else Does, October 2010.↩
National Geographic Traveler. Andy's Edinburgh, November 2009.↩
FLCC Event Press Release, June 22 2010↩
Top Online Influences In Travel, referenced November 29 2010↩
Magazine Website↩
Consultancy Website↩
Published by Destinworld↩
Blogworld 2010 Speaker List, Referenced 29 November 2010↩
Speaker Bio, Referenced November 24 2010↩


