

Erik Bradley Wilhelm (born November 16, 1965 is a former American football quarterback best remembered for his play in the National Football League from 1989 to 1997. Wilhelm was drafted by the Cincinnati Bengals of the NFL in the 3rd round of the 1989 NFL Draft following four years at Oregon State University where he set a number of school passing records. During his six year NFL career Wilhelm was a backup to the durable Boomer Esiason, seeing action in a total of 23 games, starting just once.
After his time in the his NFL career Wilhelm played arena football for the Portland Prowlers of the Indoor Professional Football League in 2000 and for the Los Angeles Avengers of the Arena Football League in 2001.
Biography
Early years
Erik Bradley Wilhelm was born November 16, 1965 in the American city of Dayton, Ohio.
Wilhelm began playing high school football at Gladstone High School in Gladstone, Oregon, located 12 miles south of Portland, the state's biggest city. The left-handed quarterback developed into a fledgling star, gaining honors as a junior in 1982 when he was named to the Class-AA Oregon All-State team.1
In the summer of 1983 Wilhelm's family moved to Lake Oswego, Oregon, another Portland suburb, with Erik enrolling at Lakeridge High School for his senior year.2 There he quickly won the role of starting quarterback, taking over for the school's recently-graduated Class-AAA All-State quarterback, Todd Beahm.3 The highly-touted Wilhelm's collegiate options were broad and he accepted a scholarship to Oregon State University in Corvallis, Oregon, where he enrolled in the fall of 1984.
Collegiate career
NFL career
Post-NFL football
After being cut from the NFL, Wilhelm returned to the Pacific Northwest, settling in the Southwest Washington city of Vancouver, just north of Portland, Oregon.4 There he worked in partnership with his mother as a residential property manager.5
Wilhelm still aspired for a return to the National Football League, believing he still had a sufficient range of skills to play at that level, and for the next three years worked out with a view to returning to the professional game, playing flag football to stay in shape and regularly throwing balls to friend Chad Carlson, a former player in the Canadian Football League.6 Carlson, who formerly played wide receiver for the short-lived Portland Forest Dragons of the Arena Football League (AFL), learned of a franchise coming to Portland as part of the new Indoor Professional Football League (IPFL) and he persuaded Wilhelm to join him in trying out for the team.7
In 2000 Wilhelm joined the Portland Prowlers of the IPFL as the team's starting quarterback.8 Wilhelm found the camaraderie of the IPFL fulfilling, if not financially lucrative, noting in a 2000 interview:

&quot;&quot;I'm enjoying it tremendously because it's guys coming together, bonding and going for a common goal to win games and to learn an offense together, to practice together, to get beat up by the other team. Whether you have success or fail, you do it together. There's nothing that can really replace something like that. It's why guys play football. No matter if it's the NFL and you're getting paid a whole bunch of money or this league where you're gettin' beer and pizza money.&quot;9

Wilhelm moved to the better established Arena Football League for the 2001 season, joining the AFL's Los Angeles Avengers for the 2001 season.
Recent years
Footnotes

External links

AFL stats






Category:1965 births Category:Living people Category:People from Dayton, Ohio Category:Lakeridge High School alumni Category:American football quarterbacks Category:Oregon State Beavers football players Category:Cincinnati Bengals players Category:New York Jets players Category:Los Angeles Avengers players



Jim Thomas, &quot;Lakeridge No. 2, so Cougars Try Harder,&quot; The Bulletin [Bend, OR], vol. 50, no. 240 (Sept. 12, 1983), pg. D1.↩


Kevin Hampton, &quot;One More Shot at Glory,&quot; Albany Democrat-Herald, July 16, 2000.↩







