
The Central American Squirrel Monkey (Saimiri oerstedii) is a squirrel monkey species from Central America. It is found in Costa Rica and Panama on the Pacific coast. Even within Costa Rica and Panama the Central American Squirrel Monkey's range is highly restricted. Within Panama its range is limited to the Western Pacific tip near the Costa Rica border, and within Costa Rica its range is limited to the Central and Southern Pacific coast, primarily in Maunuel Antonio and Corcovado National Parks.
It is a small monkey with an orange back and a distinctive white and black facial mask. It lives in large groups that typically contain between 20 and 75 monkeys. It has one of the most egalitarian social structures of all monkeys. Females do not form dominance hierarchies, and males only form dominance hierachies at breeding season. But even during breeding season, males do not fight over females and do not attempt to force females to copulate with them. It has an omnivorous diet, eating fruits, other plant materials, invertebrates (especially grasshoppers and caterpillars) and some small vertebrates. It turn, it has a number of predators, including raptors, cats and smakes.
Reproduction is seasonal, with all births occurring within a short period of time in February and March. Females become sexually mature at 2 1/2 years, and males become sexually mature at 4 to 5 years. Sexually mature females leave the natal group, but males can remain with their natal group their entire life. The Central American Squirrel Monkey can live for more than 15 years.
Description
The Central American Squirrel Monkey differs in coloration from squirrel monkeys from South America. While South American squirrel monkeys tend to be primarily greenish in color, the Central American Squirrel Monkey has a orange back with olive shoulders, hips and tail and white undersides. The hands and feet are also orange. There is a black cap at the top of the head, and a black tip at the end of the tail. Males generally have lighter caps than females. The face is white with black rims around the eyes and black around the nose and mouth.12 
There are two subspecies which are similar in coloration, but differ in the shade of the cap. The northern subspecies, living in Central Pacific Costa Rica, has a lighter cap than the southern subspecies, which lives in Panama and in parts of Costa Rica near Panama.3
Adults reach a length of between , excluding tail, and a weight between .45 The tail is longer than the body, and between  in length.6 As with other squirrel monkeys, there is considerable sexual dimorphism. On average, males weigh 16% more than females.7 Males have an average body weight of  and females have an average body weight of .8
Squirrel monkeys have the largest brains of all primates relative to their body size.9 The Central American Squirrel Monkey's brain weighs about , or about 4% of its body weight.10
Unlike larger relatives, such as the capuchin, spider and howler monkeys, adult Central American Squirrel Monkeys do not have a fully prehensile tail. The tail has some flexibility, allowing it to help the monkey cling to a tree. Newborn infant Central American Squirrel Monkeys do have fully prehensile tails, but lose that feature within a few weeks after birth.
Distribution and habitat
The Central American Squirrel Monkey has a restricted distribution in Costa Rica and Panama. It lives only near the Pacific coast. Its range covers Central Pacific Costa Rica in the north through western Panama.
The Central American Squirrel Monkey lives lowland forests.11 It is restricted to secondary forests and also in primary forests which have been partially logged.12 It requires forests with abundant low and mid-level vegetation.1314 It has difficulty surviving in tall, mature, undisturbed forests that do not have abundant low level vegetation.15
The Central American Squirrel Monkey lives in two of Costa Rica's national parks &lt;U+2014&gt; Manuel Antonio National Park and Corcovado National Park &lt;U+2014&gt; where it can be seen by visitors.16 However, it is not as commonly seen in these parks as the White-headed Capuchin or the Mantled Howler monkeys.17
Behavior
Social Structure
Central American Squirrel Monkeys live in groups containing several adult males, several adult females and juveniles. The group size tends to be smaller than that of South American squirrel monkeys, but still larger than many other New World Monkey species. Group size generally numbers between 20 and 75 monkeys, with a mean group size of 41 monkeys.1819 Groups in excess of 100 sometimes occur, but these are generally believed to be temporary mergers of two groups.20 On average, groups contain about 60% more females than males.21
The squirrel monkey groups have a home range of between 35 and 63 hectares.22 Group ranges can overlap, especially in large, protected areas such as Manuel Antonio National Park. Less overlap occurs in more fragmented areas.23 Groups can cover 2500 to 4200 meters per day.24 Unlike, some other monkey species, the group does not split into separate foraging groups during the day. But individual monkeys may separate for the main group to engage in different activities (e.g., foraging, playing, resting) for periods of time, and thus the group may be deispersed over an area of up to three acres at any given time.25 The group tends to sleep in the same trees every night for months at a time, unlike other squirrel monkeys.26
There are no dominance hierarchies among the females, and the females do not form coalitions.2728 Males only form dominance hierarchies during breeding season.29 Males in the group are generally related to each other and thus tend to form strong affiliations.30 This is especially the case among males of the same age.31 Neither males nor females are dominant over each other. The Central American Squirrel Monkey's egalitarian social system is unique to Central American squirrel monkeys. In South American species, either the females (S. boliviensis) or males (S. sciureus) are dominant over the other sex, and both sexes form stable dominance hierarchies.32 Groups generally do not compete or fight with each other.33 Males are primarily responsible for watching for predators.34
Although South American species of squirrel monkeys often travel with and feed together with capuchin monkeys, the Central American Squirrel Monkey only rarely associates with the White-headed Capuchin. This appears to be related to the fact that the distribution food that the Central American Squirrel Monkey eats, differs from that of the South American squirrel monkeys. As a result of the different food distribution, associating with capuchin monkeys would impose higher foraging costs for the Central American Squirrel Monkey than for their South American counterparts. In addition, while male White-headed Capuchins are alert to predators, they devote more attention to detecting rival males than to detecting predators. Therefore, associating with capuchins would provide less predator detection benefits and impose higher foraging costs on the Central American Squirrel Monkey than on South American squirrel monkeys.3536
Certain bird species associate with the Central American Squirrel Monkey. The birds follow the monkeys in a attempt to prey on insects and small vertebrates that the monkeys flush out. At Corcovado National Park, bird species known to regularly follow squirrel monkeys include the Double-toothed Kite, the Grey-headed Tanager and the Tawny-winged Woodcreeper, but other species, such as other woodcreepers, motmots, trogons, and even some birds of prey do so as well. This activity increases during the wet season, when arthropods are harder to find.37
Diet

Central American Squirrel Monkey foraging in Manuel Antonio National Park in Costa Rica

The Central American Squirrel Monkey is omnivorous. Its diet includes insects and insect larvae (especially grasshoppers and caterpillars), spiders, fruit, leaves, bark, flowers and nectar. It also eats small vertebrates, including bats, birds, lizards and frogs. It finds its food foraging through the lower and middle levels of the forest, typically between fifteen and thirty feet high.3839
It has a unique method of capturing Tent-making Bats. It looks for roosting bats by looking for their tents (which are made of a folded leaf). When it finds a bat it climbs to a higher level and jumps onto the tent from above, attempting to dislodge the bat. If the fallen bat doesn't fly away in time, the monkey pounces on it on the ground and eats it.40
It eats a wide variety of fruits. Fruits eaten include cecropias, legumes, figs, palms, cerillo, quiubra, yayo flaco, wild cashew fruits, and fruits from relatives of the black pepper and coffee plants.4142
The Central American Squirrel Monkey is believed to be an important seed disperser. It is also believed to be a pollenator of certain flowers, including the passion flower. While it is not a significant agricultural pest, it does sometimes eat corn, coffee, bananas and mangos.
Two thirds to three quarters of each day is spent foraging for food. It has difficulty finding its desired food late in the wet season, when fewer arthropods are available to eat.43
Communication
The Central American Squirrel Monkey is noisy. It makes many squeals, whistles and chirps.44 It also travels through the forest noisily, disturbing vegetation as it moves through.45 Its has four main calls, which have been described as a &quot;smooth chuck&quot;, a &quot;bent mask chuck&quot;, a &quot;peep&quot; and a &quot;twitter&quot;.46
Predators
Predators of the Central American Squirrel Monkey include raptors, cats and snakes. Both constricting and venomous snakes prey on squirrel monkeys. Raptors are particularly effective predators of Central American Squirrel Monkeys.47 The oldest males bear most of the responsibility for detecting predators.48 When a Central American Squirrel Monkey detects a raptor, it gives a high-pitched alarm peep and dives for cover. All other squirrel monkeys that hear the alarm call also dive for cover. The monkeys are particularly cautious about raptors, and give alarms and dive for cover when they detect any raptor-like object, including small airplanes and even falling branches and large leaves.49
Predator detection by the males becomes particularly important during the period when the infants are born. Raptors spend significantly more time near the squirrel monkey troops during this period, and prey on a significant number of the newborn infants. Other animals that prey on Central American Squirrel Monkey infants include toucans, tayras, opossums, coatis, snakes, and even spider monkeys.50
Reproduction

Two month old infant riding on mother's back

The breeding season for the Central American Squirrel Monkey is in September.51 All females come into estrus at virtually the same time. A month or two before the breeding season begins, males become larger. This is not due to extra muscle, but due to altered water balance within the male's body. This, in turn, is caused by the male hormone testosterone being converted to estrogen. The more testosterone a male produces, the more he grows in advance of the breeding season. Since males within a group have not been observed fighting over access to females during breeding season, nor attempting to force females to copulate with them, it is believed that female choice determines which males get to breed with females. And females tend to prefer the males that expand the most in advance of breeding season. This may be because the most enlarged males are generally the oldest and the most effective at detecting predators. Or this may be a case of runaway intersexual selection.52
Males sometimes leave their group for short periods of time during the breeding season in order to try to mate with females from neighboring groups. Females are receptive to males from other groups, although resident males attempt to repel the intruding males. The gestation period is six months, and the infants are born within the span of a single week during February and March. A single infant is typically born.535455
The infant remains dependent on its mother for about one year.56 Females give birth every 12 months, so the prior infant becomes independent at about the same time the new infant is born. Females become sexually mature at 2 1/2 years old, while males become sexually mature at between 4 and 5 years old.57 The females leave their natal group upon reaching sexual maturity, while males usually remain with their natal group their entire lives. This is different from South American squirrel monkey species, where either males disperse from their natal group or both sexes disperse.58 Males of the same age tend to associate with each other in age cohorts. If upon reaching sexual maturity, an age cohort may choose to leave the group and attempt to oust the males from another group in order to attain increased reproductive opportunities.59
The lifespan of the Central American Squirrel Monkey in the wild is unknown, but captive specimens have been know to live more than 15 years.60 Other squirrel monkey species are known to be able to live more than 20 years.61
Status
It was once believed that the Central American Squirrel Monkey was just a population of a South American species of squirrel monkey brought to Central America by humans. Evidence for this theory included the very small range of the Central American Squirrel Monkey and the large gap from the range of any other squirrel monkey species. However, a study of nuclear and mitochondrial DNA demonstrated that the Central American Squirrel Monkey is indeed a separate species that apparently diverged from the South American species long ago - at least 260,000 years ago and possibly more than 4 million years ago.62
 One popular theory is that squirrel monkeys did live in Columbia during the late Miocene or Pliocene and these squirrel monkeys migrated to Central America, becoming the ancestors of the current Central American species. According to this theory, the Guatemalan Black Howler migrated to Central America around the same time. However, passage through the isthmus of Panama later closed due to rising oceans, and later opened up to another wave of migration about 2 million years ago. These later migrants, ancestors to modern populations of White-headed Capuchins, Mantled Howlers and Geoffroy's Spider Monkeys, outcompeted the earlier migrants, leading to the small range of the Central American Squirrel Monkey (as well as the Guatemalan Black Howler).63
It has been estimated that the population of the Central American Squirrel Monkey has been reduced from about 200,000 in the 1970s to less than 5000.64 This is believed to be largely due to deforestation, hunting, and capture for the pet trade.65 There are significant efforts within Costa Rica to try to preserve this monkey from extinction.6667 A reforestation project within Panama tries to preserve the vanishing population of the Chiriqui Province 68.
The population density has been estimated at 36 monkeys per kilometer in Costa Rica and 130 monkeys per kilometer in Panama.69
As of 2008, the Central American Squirrel Monkey is listed as &quot;vulnerable&quot; from a conservation standpoint by the IUCN. This is due to the fact that its range encompasses just 8000 square kilometers, its range is fragmented, and it suffers from ongoing habitat loss. However, this assessment is an improvement from the 2003 assessment, in which the Central American Squirrel Monkey was listed as &quot;endangered&quot;.70
Taxonomy
The Central American Squirrel Monkey is a member of the family Cebidae, the family of New World monkeys containing capuchin monkeys, squirrel monkeys, tamarins and marmosets. Within the family Cebidae, it is a member of the subfamily Saimiriinae, the subfamily containing squirrel monkeys.71 It is one of five recognized species of squirrel monkey, and the only species occurring outside South America.72 The Central American Squirrel Monkey is placed in genus Saimiri (Voigt, 1831) along with all the other squirrel monkey species.
There are two subspecies of the Central American Squirrel Monkey:73

Black-crowned Central American Squirrel Monkey, Saimiri oerstedii oerstedii
Grey-crowned Central American Squirrel Monkey, Saimiri oerstedii citrinellus

S. o. oerstadii lives in the western Pacific portion of Panama and the Osa Peninsula area of Costa Rica (including Corcovado National Park), while S. o. citrinellus lives in the Central Pacific portion of Costa Rica. It has been estimated (most recently in 2003) that the remaining wild population of S. o. citrinellus is only about 1300 to 1800 individuals.74
References

www.saimiri.org reforestation for the las Panamanian Squirrel Monkeys
External links



ARKive - images and movies of the red-backed squirrel monkey (Saimiri oerstedii)
ASCOMOTI Foundation for Preservation of the Central American Squirrel Monkey (mono titi)
Infonatura


ca:Saimiri oerstedi fr:Saimiri oerstedii it:Saimiri oerstedii ja:&lt;U+30BB&gt;&lt;U+30A2&gt;&lt;U+30AB&gt;&lt;U+30EA&gt;&lt;U+30B9&gt;&lt;U+30B6&gt;&lt;U+30EB&gt; fi:Panamansaimiri
Category:New World monkeys Squirrel Monkey, Central American Squirrel Monkey, Central American



↩
↩


↩



↩


↩



↩
↩






↩
↩









↩
↩

























↩
↩


Saving the Central American Squirrel Monkey↩
Save the Mono Titi Manuel Antonio Costa Rica↩
--&gt;↩


↩





