
Trimax Mowing Systems is an New Zealand based manufacturer of professional turf maintenance equipment. Trimax designs, develops, builds and markets high quality  roller mowers with flail or rotary blade systems. The company's headquarters are located in Tauranga, New Zealand.
History
The Company was founded by the former  GM Production Engineer Bob Sievwright. After he graduated  General Motors Institute in Flint, Michigan he designed, manufactured and sold special flails for flail mowers. But after he lost his only customer he started his own mowing company. The first mowers were flail mowers and flail mulchers for kiwifruit cultivation, Trimax was soon recognised for their high quality of cut and strong build Roller mower.12
In 1981 the company, then named Trimax Industries Ltd., began with the production of their first flail mowers Ezeemow, Mowcraft and Mulchmasta. Only a few years later, in 1985, the company started its own dedicated research and developement department and exported their first products to Australia.
The Company was awarded for &quot;Best Engineering&quot; in 1991 and &quot;Exporter of the Year&quot; in 1993 by the BNZ Bay of Plenty Export Awards.3
To support Trimax' early exports to the USA, Bob Sievwright started the company &quot;Base3USA&quot; in the early 90's. The company is based in Griffin, Georgia near  Atlanta and provides warehouses, logistics and fulfilment for other importers.4 5
In 1997 Windsor Castle and the surrounding Windsor Great Park started using Trimax ProCut mowers for their maintenance.6
In 1998 the company opened their first UK office and warehouse in Little Addington, Northamptonshire to supply local dealers and in 2005 they opened their very own distribution warehouse in Griffin, Georgia, USA.
In 2008 the Pegasus S3 mower was awarded bronze at the 2008 New Zealand Best Design Awards. And 2 years later the Trimax Merlin mower, the predecessor of Snake, was awarded silver at the 2010 New Zealand Best Design Awards.7
The company won the Bay of Plenty Export Awards for the second time in 2010 and is regarded as the most prominent company of the region.8
In 2011 Trimax Mowing Systems was awarded Elite dealer of the year at the UK Awards.9
Since early 2012 some parts for their FlailDek FX and Pegasus S3 mowers are manufactured in Great Britain.10 In late 2014 Trimax moved their UK offices and warehouse to Northampton, Northamptonshire.
Trimax Mowing Systems manufacturs at their headquarters in New Zealand and have corporate offices and warehouses in the UK, Australia and the USA and export their products to South Africa, France, Sweden, Norway, Denmark, the Netherlands and Germany.
Notable Grounds maintained with Trimax Mowers:

Guards Polo Club uses Trimax Stealth S2 and the new Trimax Snake Mowers for their maintenance.11


Old Course at St Andrews uses Trimax Merlin mowers for their fairways and rough.12


The Waikato Stadium in Hamilton, New Zealand, uses Trimax ProCut S3 for their grass maintenance. The Stadium hosts the Chiefs, a Super Rugby team.13


Raglan Parc Golf Club at the Raglan Castle uses Trimax Snake mower for their semi-rough.14


Silverstone Circuit uses Trimax Stealth mowers since 1999 for the turf around the track.15


Atlanta Motor Speedway uses Trimax Pegasus mowers since 2009 for the infield.16

Products
All Trimax roller mower are tractor powered and have either flail or rotary blade systems.17
All Trimax mowers feature full width rollers on all cutting decks that follow the contour of every surface and provide anti-scalp protection. The rollers also allow mowing along kerbs and run across concrete areas without damaging the blades.
For legal street transportation most of the mowers can be equipped with a road kit that includes mudguards, safety signs and LED tail light clusters. 
Current Models (October 2014):
Rotary Mowers

Striker, a basic rotary mower for compact tractors. 150cm and 190cm wide models.


ProCut S3, a versatile rotary mower for commercial environments with cylinder-like cut quality for best presentation.


Topper, a special high spinning rotary mower for pasture grass, only for the New Zealand market.


Snake, a special rotary mower for sports turf and golf courses. The Snake has the ability to adapt to every surface and to cut the gras evenly.


Stealth S2, a folding 3.4m wide rotary mower. Stealth S2 is also available as front mount.


Pegasus S3, a folding three deck rotary mower for wide area mowing. All mower decks can be raised and lowered from the tractor seat to transport the mower quickly between locations.


X-Wam, a folding five deck extra wide 10.4m rotary mower. Currently the biggest mower Trimax has to offer. All mower decks can be raised and lowered from the tractor seat to transport the mower quickly between locations.

Trimax rotary mowers are fitted with a special blade system with an offset mounting hole that alters the center of gravity of the blade causing it to tilt-forward whilst cutting. This will help to avoid strips of uncut gras when going through heavy grounds. The Blades, marketed as &quot;Trimax LazerBladez&quot;, are made from a special alloy steel which provides greater durability needed in commercial mowing operations.
Flail Mowers

Ezeemow S2, a flail mower for compact tractors.


FlailDek FX, a front-mounting flail mower. A special front-mounting tractor is required.


Warlord S2, a heavy duty flail mower and mulcher for tractors up to 100hp. The Warlord S2 can shred branches up to 75mm in diameter.

Trimax flail mowers are fitted with special flails designed by the company's founder, Bob Sievwright. The aerodynamic design of the flails reduces the horse power requirements for the tractor.
References

External links




Category:Agricultural machinery manufacturers Category:Manufacturing companies of New Zealand



http://www.trimaxmowers.com/index.php/9-articles/224-history.html↩
NZ Business;Feb95, Vol. 9 Issue 1, p24↩
NZ Business;Sep2008, Vol. 22 Issue 8, p4↩
http://exportermagazine.co.nz/articles/sourcing-logistics-solutions↩
http://www.base3usa.com/home.php?id=265↩
NZ Management, Issue March 2002; http://www.management.co.nz/articles/kindest-cut↩
http://bestawards.co.nz/entries/product/category/non-consumer/merlin/↩
http://www.nzherald.co.nz/bay-of-plenty-times/news/article.cfm?c_id=1503343&amp;objectid=10997687↩
http://www.pitchcare.com/magazine/trimax-elite-dealer-of-the-year-uk-awards.html↩
http://www.pitchcare.com/magazine/debut-for-second-uk-built-trimax-mower.html↩
Wildlife Groundcare News &amp; Offers Summer 2014 page 19; http://www.listerwilder.co.uk/groundcare/testimonials.php↩
Greenkeeping, Issue 81, December 2012↩
http://gmlsport.se/produkter/trimax-procut-s3/↩
Greenkeeping, Issue 100, July 2014↩
NZ Management, Issue March 2002↩
http://www.v8.co.nz/tag/trimax↩
http://www.golfbusinessnews.com/news/corporate/trimax-issues-reminder-about-three-year-warranty/↩


