 The Eurasian Land Bridge, sometimes called the New Silk Road, is a term used to describe the rail transport route for moving freight and/or passengers overland from Pacific seaports in eastern Russia and mainland China to seaports in Europe. The route comprises the Trans-Siberian Railway, which runs through Russia and is sometimes called the Northern East-West Corridor, and the New Eurasian Land Bridge or Second Eurasian Continental Bridge, running through China and Kazakhstan.
Completed in 1916, the Trans-Siberian connects Moscow with Russian Pacific seaports such as Vladivostok. From the 1960s until the early 1990s the railroad served as the primary land bridge between Asia and Europe, until several issues caused the use of the railway for transcontinental freight to dwindle. On issue is the railways of the former Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (USSR) use a wider rail gauge than most of the rest of Europe and China. Recently, however, the Trans-Siberian has regained ground as a viable land route between the two continents.
In 1990 China linked its rail system to the Trans-Siberian via Kazakhstan, allowing freight from China to travel by rail to Europe. China calls it's uninterrupted rail link between the Chinese port city of Lianyungang and Kazakhstan the New Eurasian Land Bridge or Second Eurasian Continental Bridge. In addition to Kazakhstan, the railways connect with other countries in Central Asia, including Iran, but do not connect all the way to Europe through south Asia.
Proposed expansion of the Eurasian Land Bridge includes construction of a railway across Kazakhstan that is the same gauge as Chinese railways, rail links to India, Myanmar, Thailand, and Malaysia, and construction of a rail tunnel or bridge across the Bering Strait to connect the Trans-Siberian to the North American rail system. The United Nations and LaRouche movement have advocated further development of the Eurasian Land Bridge.
Background
Commercial traffic between Europe and East Asia took place along the Silk Road from at least the 2nd millennium BCE. The Silk Road was not a specific thoroughfare, but a general route used by traders to travel, much of it by land, between the two continents.,1
Traffic along the route began to diminish with the development of the sea route around the Cape of Good Hope in the 16th Century. By the 18th century, European influence on trade and new national boundries severely restricted the movement of traders along land routes between Europe and China, and overland trade between East Asia and Europe virtually disappeared.2
Trans-Siberian Railway
 The Trans-Siberian Railway and its various associated branches and supporting lines, completed in 1916, established the first rail connection between Europe and Asia, from Moscow to Vladivostok. The line, at , is the longest rail line in the world.3
Currently, the Trans-Siberian connects Pyongyang, Vladivostok, and Nakhodka with Moscow. Rail links at Moscow allow passengers and freight to connect to train lines running further west into Europe. By making further transfers, passengers and freight can eventually reach western European seaports.4
Former countries of the USSR use a track gauge of . The international standard rail gauge used in most of Europe and China is . As a result, trains cannot run from China or European countries into or out of the former USSR without changing bogies. Changing the bogies on a rail car takes 5-6 hours and special, heavy equipment. In many cases, freight is transshipped from one train to another instead of changing the bogies. In the case of liquids, frozen goods, and hazardous materials, however, the bogies are usually changed.5
Originally built to allow the Soviet government to project political power into its territories in Asia, in the 1960s the USSR opened the Trans-Siberian as an international trade route connecting the western Pacific with Europe. Problems with shipping freight along the Trans-Siberian, however, including backlogs at the Russian Pacific ports caused by dilapidated rail infrastructures, theft, damaged freight, late trains, inflated freight fees, uncertain scheduling for return of containers, and geopolitical tension reduced the use of the route for international trade to almost zero by the 1990s.6
According to Hofstra University, there is presently renewed interest in using the Trans-Siberian as a route across Asia to Europe. An advantage of the Trans-Siberian route over the China-Central Asian rail route (detailed below) is that trains must change bogies only once, at the borders of the former USSR.7 Also, the Trans-Siberian links directly to railroads which ultimately connect, via Finland and Sweden, to the year-round ice-free port of Narvik in Norway. At Narvik, freight can be transshipped to ships to cross the Atlantic to North America. Total transit time between Vladivostok and New York City using this route is reportedly 10 days. Rail links from Russia also connect to Rotterdam, but may encounter greater congestion along this route with resulting delays.8
In an effort to attract use of the Trans-Siberian to transport goods from Japan, China, and Korea to Europe, in the mid-1990s Russia lowered tariffs on freight using the railway. As a result, freight volume over the rail line doubled in 1999 and 2000.9
China and the land bridge
Rail links between China and Russia
 In 1985 construction commenced on the Beijiang Railway to link the Chinese and Russian rail networks via Kazakhstan. The section between &lt;U+00DC&gt;r&lt;U+00FC&gt;mqi and Alashankou was completed on September 16, 1990, linking the train lines of the two countries at Dostyk. In July 1991 the first freight train traveled along the line from China to Kazakhstan's then-capital of Almaty.10 Because Kazakhstan was once a member of the USSR, its train system connects with and carries the same rail gauge as the Russian rail system, as well as the other central Asian republics of Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan, Kyrgyzstan, and Tajikistan.11
From Kazakhstan, three north-south railways connect with the Russian rail system. Two connect with the Trans-Siberian railway while the other goes directly to Moscow. These links to the Russian rail system are sometimes called the Eurasian Railway.12
In January 2008 China and Germany inaugurated a long distance freight train service between Beijing and Hamburg. Traveling a total of , the train uses the China Railways, Inner Mongolia line to connect to Ulan Bator, where it then continues north to the Trans-Siberian. After reaching the end of the Trans-Siberian at Moscow, the train continues to Germany via rail links in Belarus and Poland. Total transit time is 15 days, as opposed to the 30 days average it would take for the freight to make the same journey by ship. The first train, carrying a mixed load of clothes, ceramics, and electronics, traveled on tracks operated by six different railways.13 Hartmut Mehdorn, chairman of Deutsche Bahn, stated that regularly scheduled China-Germany freight services should be in operation by 2010.14
New Eurasian Land Bridge
The New Eurasian Land Bridge, also called the New Eurasian Continental Bridge, is the name given to China's rail link with central Asia. The route includes China's east-west railways which, in addition to the Beijiang Line, are the Longhai Railway and the Lanxin railway. Together, the railways create an uninterrupted rail link between the port city of Lianyungang and Kazakhstan. In 1995 the Chinese and Kazakhstan governments signed an agreement which allows the latter to use Lianyungang as its primary seaport for exports and imports.15 China intends for Lianyungang to serve as the designated starting point for the New Eurasian Land Bridge.16
From Almaty in Kazakhstan, the railway extends to Tashkent and Samarkand, Uzbekistan and then to Tejen, Turkmenistan. From Tejen, another line continues to Ashgabat, the capital of Turkenistan. After Ashgabat, the line ends at T&lt;U+00FC&gt;rkmenba&lt;U+015F&gt;y, Turkmenistan, a port on the Caspian Sea.17
In 1996 a branch railway from Tejen was constructed across the border with Iran and linked to the Islamic Republic of Iran Railways. The link potentially enables rail freight from China to reach ports on the Persian Gulf, and via other train lines, to reach into the Caucasus and Turkey.18 The central Asian route, however, does not extend all the way into Europe. There is no rail link across the Bosphorus.19 Iran rail lines use a narrower gauge than Russia and the former Soviet republics, requiring freight cars transiting from China into Iran to change wheel gauges twice.20
Chinese state media claims that the New Eurasian Land/Continental Bridge extends from Lianyungang to Rotterdam, a distance of . The exact route used to connect the two cities, whether through Mongolia or Kazakhstan, however, is unclear.21
Proposed development
Expansion projects
 On March 10, 2004 Kazakhstan Railway Co., Ltd announced that it was looking for investors to fund the construction of a railway stretching  from China across Kazakhstan that would be the same gauge as Chinese railways. Thus, the railway would allow trains from China to cross Kazakhstan without having to change bogies. The reported construction cost of the new railway was $3.5 billion. Chinese media reported that the railway would complete the link between China and Europe via central Asia, but it is unclear where the actual link to Europe would be. Also unclear is whether construction has yet to begin on the project.22
The governments of India and Myanmar have proposed building, with China's cooperation, a link to the Eurasian Land Bridge that would start in India and/or Myanmar and connect to China's rail system in Yunnan. The route would allow freight from India and Myanmar to travel overland to Europe. The link would also give rail access for China to the Indian Ocean. One proposed starting point for the route is Kyaukpyu. The governments of Thailand and Malaysia are also studying the feasibility of establishing rail links with China.23
Both Russia and China are seeking to establish a permanent rail link with South Korea by way of North Korea to allow South Korean goods to be shipped to Europe via the Eurasian Land Bridge. According to Choi Yeon-Hye, a professor of marketing and management at the Korea National Railway College, a rail connection from Busan to Rotterdam would cut shipping time from 26 to 16 days and save $800 per container of freight.24
Bering Strait link

 In April 2007 the Russian government announced that it was considering building a rail tunnel under the Bering Strait between Chukotka and Alaska. The tunnel, as projected, would be  long and would include oil and gas pipelines, fiber optic cables, and power lines.25 The tunnel project was estimated to cost $65 billion and take 15-20 years to build. In addition to the Russian government, sponsors of the project apparently include Transneft and RAO United Energy Systems.26 Others, including Sun Myung Moon, have proposed building a bridge across the strait.27
The project, as envisioned, would connect the Trans-Siberian via Yakutsk in Russia with the North American rail system at Fort Nelson, British Columbia, Canada, a distance of . A significant hurdle for the project is that the nearest major road to the Russian end of the tunnel is  away. In addition, Alaska has no direct rail link to either Canada or the United States.28
LaRouche movement and the United Nations
Further development of the Eurasian Land Bridge, including a rail link across the Bering Strait, is a significant element in the LaRouche movement's political platform. Along with further construction of associated rail links, LaRouche and his supporters call for the development of industrial and agricultural zones which would support and benefit from expansion of the Eurasian Land Bridge infrastructure.29
The United Nations Development Programme has also advocated greater regional integration along the Eurasian Land Bridge.30 Chinese leaders have called for the establishment of free trade zones at both ends of the Eurasian Land Bridge to facilitate development.31 Said Khalid Malik, United Nations Resident Coordinator in China, &quot;If this comes true, it will enable the continental bridge to play its due role in enhancing co-operation between Asia and Europe, and promoting world peace and development.&quot;32
Notes

References
Print



















Web







Further information





Category:Rail transport in Russia Category:Post-Soviet Russia Category:Economic history of Russia Category:Economy of the Russian Far East Category:Economy of Siberia Category:Economy of Vladivostok Category:Transport in the Russian Far East Category:International bridges Category:History of foreign trade in China Category:Economic integration Category:Transnationalism Category:Rail transport in Asia Category:Rail transport in Europe Category:Rail transport in the People's Republic of China Category:Rail transport in Kazakhstan Category:Rail cooperatives Category:Rail freight transport Category:History of rail transport Category:International railway lines Category:International rail transport Category:Passenger rail transport Category:LaRouche movement



&lt;U+014C&gt;tsuka, p. 42.↩

Rodrigue; Wehrfritz.↩
&lt;U+014C&gt;tsuka, pp. 48&lt;U+2013&gt;49.↩
China Daily; &lt;U+014C&gt;tsuka, p. 48; Rodrigue.↩
Rodrigue, &lt;U+014C&gt;tsuka, p. 49; Wehrfritz.↩
&lt;U+014C&gt;tsuka, p. 49.↩
Rodrigue.↩
Wehrfritz.↩
&lt;U+014C&gt;tsuka, pp. 42&lt;U+2013&gt;43.↩
&lt;U+014C&gt;tsuka, pp. 42&lt;U+2013&gt;43, 48.↩
&lt;U+014C&gt;tsuka, pp. 45&lt;U+2013&gt;46.↩
Rodrigue; International Railway Journal; Underhill.↩
International Railway Journal.↩
China Daily, &lt;U+014C&gt;tsuka, pp. 42&lt;U+2013&gt;43.↩
Ren.↩
&lt;U+014C&gt;tsuka, p. 44.↩
&lt;U+014C&gt;tsuka, pp. 42, 44; Mirak-Weissbach.↩
&lt;U+014C&gt;tsuka, pp. 42, 44.↩

Xinhua, &quot;NW China mulls 'New Silk Road' exhibition park&quot;.↩
China Daily.↩
Wehrfritz; The Statesman; Xinhua, &quot;Experts propose developing SW corridor of third Asia-Europe land-bridge&quot;.↩
Wehrfritz; Funabashi.↩
Blomfield.↩
Hearst; Associated Press, &quot;Bering Strait tunnel proposed&quot;.↩
Associated Press, &quot;Bering Strait tunnel proposed&quot;; Washington Times.↩
Blomfield; Hearst.↩
Qazwini; Sciacca; The Virginian-Pilot.↩
Xinhua, &quot;China northwest city to host UN meet on Eurasia continental bridge 29 Jun-4 Jul&quot;.↩
Xinhua, &quot;China: Congress deputies propose free trade zones along continental bridge&quot;.↩
Fu.↩


