The Canadian Human Rights Commission was established in 1977 by the government of Canada. It is empowered under the Canadian Human Rights Act to investigate and try to settle complaints of discrimination in employment and in the provision of services within federal jurisdiction. The CHRC is also empowered under the Employment Equity Act to ensure that federally regulated employers provide equal opportunities for four designated groups: women, Aboriginal people, the disabled and visible minorities. The CHRC also acts as an advocate for human rights and issues reports on various aspects of discrimination as well as educational materials designed to promote human rights and inform employers and the general public about human rights regulations. The Commission also sponsors research into human rights and makes policy recommendations.
The Commission is composed of eight commissioners. The Chief Commissioner and Deputy Commissioner are appointed for terms not exceeding seven years while other commissioners are appointed for three year terms.
Jennifer Lynch was appointed Chief Commissioner of the Canadian Human Rights Commission in March 2007.
The daily work of the Commission is carried out by a staff of approximately 200 people.
The Commission investigates complaints, attempts to facilitate a resolution between the parties if appropriate and refers matters for which a resolution cannot be found to the Canadian Human Rights Tribunal which holds hearings and hands down rulings. Where appropriate, the CHRC may a prosecutorial role in Canadian Human Rights Tribunal much like a Crown Attorney. 1
The Canadian Human Rights Commission is one of two Canadian human rights committees currently investigating whether author and syndicated columnist, Mark Steyn, is guilty of violating the human rights of four Muslim law students who were offended by an article which appeared in Maclean's magazine. The investigation began when the Canadian Islamic Congress launched human rights complaints against Maclean's claiming that the article The future belongs to Islam, an excerpt from Mark Steyn's book &quot;America Alone: The End of the World as We Know It,&quot; subjects Canadian Muslims to &quot;hatred and contempt.&quot; 2
See also

Human Rights Commission

External links

Canadian Human Rights Commission


Why should free-born Canadians require the permission of the state to read my columns? by Mark Steyn


Human Rights Gone Awry by Rex Murphy


Category:National human rights institutions Category:Human rights Category:Canadian federal departments and agencies Category:Human rights organizations
