
&quot;Treehouse of Horror VIII&quot; is the fourth episode of The Simpsons' ninth season and first aired on the Fox network on October 26, 1997.1 In the eighth annual Treehouse of Horror episode, Springfield is destroyed by a nuclear bomb leaving Homer to fight off a crowd of mutants, Bart and a fly switch heads and in a segment set in 1649, Marge is discovered to be a witch. It was written by Mike Scully, David S. Cohen &amp; Ned Goldreyer and was directed by Mark Kirkland.2
Plot
A Fox censor, sitting at his desk paging through the script and deleting things, proudly announces that thanks to his editing tonight's Simpsons episode is rated TV-G. But as he says this, a hand with a sword appears out of the on-screen rating icon and stabs him in the back repeatedly. As he collapses dead onto the desk, blood pours down the front to reveal the title, &quot;The Simpsons Halloween Special VIII&quot;.
The H&lt;U+03A9&gt;mega Man
Mayor Quimby generates a great deal of controversy over a &quot;frog's legs&quot; joke he makes about France, and when it becomes obvious that no apology is forthcoming, the French president launches a neutron bomb directly into Springfield. Homer had been inspecting a bomb shelter he was considering buying from Herman and after the blast, Homer emerges from the shelter to find that he seems to be the only person to have survived. He misses the rest of the family, but he quickly gets over his loss and dances naked in church. While dancing, he is confronted by a band of Springfield citizens who have become mutants. They claim that they want to create a perfect world in which the mistakes of the past will be eliminated. This, of course, includes killing Homer. Homer flees and arrives at his home where he finds that his family survived the blast because their house was protected by so many layers of lead paint. Seeing Homer reunited with his family, the mutants see the error of their ways. They hope they can build a Utopian society with the Simpsons, but Marge and the children open fire with shotguns that they were hiding behind their backs. Homer and his family decide to take advantage of the nuclear holocaust and go and steal some Ferraris.
Fly Vs. Fly
 Homer buys a teleporter from Professor Frink at his yard sale. Bart asks if he can use it but, Homer refuses. That night, Bart tries to sneak Snowball II into the telepoter and at the same time, Santa's Little Helper jumps in. As the pets come out, Santa's Little Helper and Snowball II have been merged into a two-headed creature. A fly lands on Bart's arm and thinking that he will become a superhero, Bart grabs the fly and steps into the teleporter. He comes out his normal head, but with the body of the fly and meanwhile the fly has his body. The rest of the family wakes up and sees Bart's body with a fly's head and decide that it must be Bart and accept him as their family. That night, Bart talks to Lisa and tells her what happened. When Lisa is in the kitchen fly-boy eats Bart and Lisa knocks him into the teleporter. Bart then appears in the living room normal. An enraged Homer grabs an axe and starts chasing Bart around for using the teleporter.
Easy-Bake Coven
 The year is 1649 and the town of Sprynge-Fielde is witness to many witch burnings. Later in the church, the townspeople try to figure out whom to condemn next. People start accusing others and soon they erupt into chaos, until Marge intervenes. She tries to talk sense into the townspeople, but Moe accuses her of being a witch. Quimby assures her that she is entitled to due process which means she will be thrown off a cliff with a broomstick; if she is a witch she will be able to fly to safety, in which case the authorities expect her to report back for punishment. If she is not a witch, then she will fall to an honorable Christian death. Lisa tries to speak on her mother's behalf, but to no avail and Marge gets shoved off the cliff by Wiggum's henchmen. As Lovejoy speaks to the mob about having done the Lord's work, they hear a cackle and all look up, stunned to see that a green-skinned Marge is flying on the broomstick, as she really is a witch. Marge then takes revenge on the town. She returns to her elder sisters Patty and Selma in their mountain lair close to Sprynge-Fielde. The sisters watch Ned and Maude Flanders talking about how the witches may eat their children, thus giving them the idea in the first place. The three set off for Sprynge-Fielde on their broomsticks. They knock on the Flanders' door and demand the kids. They put the kids in sacks and are about to leave, when Maude offers the witches gingerbread men instead. The witches like these better than the kids and let Rodd &amp; Todd go. They go to each house, getting goodies in exchange for not eating the kids. As they fly off, the Sea Captain says that is how the tradition of Halloween started, with Maude Flanders' quick thinking leading to the Halloween we know today.
The next year, the whole town is celebrating Halloween. Homer eggs the door of a house from where no candy was received. Lisa points out that it is their house. When everybody starts laughing at him, he accuses Lisa of being a witch, prompting the townspeople to start chasing her down the street.34
Production
 &quot;The H&lt;U+03A9&gt;mega Man&quot; was written by Mike Scully,5 &quot;Fly Vs. Fly&quot; was written by David S. Cohen6 and &quot;Easy-Bake Coven&quot; was written by Ned Goldreyer.7 Large portions of the &quot;Fly vs. Fly&quot; segment were cut, including the original ending where the fly also emerges from the teleporter, but is considerably larger and the Simpson family ride it to the mall.8
The producers had trouble with the censors over several segments in this episode. The opening segment of the episode, which features the Fox censor being stabbed to death and was pitched by David Mirkin, had a difficult time getting through the real life censors. They had issues with the size of the knife and the sound effects used.9 Originally the censor was stabbed with a dagger, but the censors found it too gruesome, but found the use of a sword acceptable, so it was used instead.10 The censors also had issues with Homer dancing naked on the alter in the church, so it was changed so that he was just dancing on the floor.11
This episode was the only Treehouse of Horror episode that was directed by Mark Kirkland. It was also the last episode that was worked on by Brad Bird, who left the show to direct The Iron Giant. &quot;Easy-Bake Coven&quot; was storyboarded by Kirkland and the backgrounds were designed by Lance Wilder.12 Kang and Kodos make brief appearances in every Treehouse of Horror episode, but their brief appearance in this one was nearly cut but David X. Cohen managed to persuade the producers to leave the scene in.13
Cultural references
&quot;The H&lt;U+03A9&gt;mega Man&quot; is an extended homage to film The Omega Man, which was one of Mike Scully's favorite movies as a child.14 In &quot;The H&lt;U+03A9&gt;mega Man&quot;, Homer runs over Johnny and Edgar Winter while fleeing the mutants pursuing himand he cries, &quot;Die, you chalk-faced goons!&quot; The Winter brothers are both albino.15 The title &quot;Fly vs. fly&quot; is a reference to the Mad magazine comic strip &quot;Spy vs. Spy&quot;. The segment itself is based on &quot;The Fly.16 In &quot;Easy-Bake Coven&quot;, the animators referenced the film The Crucible for many of their designs.17 Edna Krabappel is wearing a Scarlett A, which is a reference to the novel The Scarlet Letter.18 &quot;Easy Bake Coven&quot; is loosely based on the Salem witch trials, while the title is a reference to the children's toy called an Easy-Bake Oven. There is a brief reference to the Looney Tunes character Witch Hazel when Marge, Patty and Selma click their heels before flying away on their brooms.19
Awards
&quot;Treehouse of Horror VIII&quot; won a Golden Reel Award in 1998 for &quot;Best Sound Editing - Television Animated Specials&quot; for Robert Mackston, Travis Powers, Norm MacLeod and Terry Greene.20 Alf Clausen received an Emmy Award nomination for &quot;Outstanding Music Composition for a Series (Dramatic Underscore)&quot; for this episode, which he ultimately lost.21
References

External links



&quot;Treehouse of Horror VIII&quot; at The Simpsons.com


&quot;Treehouse of Horror VIII&quot; at TV.com



it:La paura fa novanta VIII
Category:Halloween fiction Category:The Simpsons episodes, season 9 Category:Halloween television specials



↩




↩


↩
↩









↩
↩


