
A Boer goat buck

The Boer goat was developed in South Africa in the early 1900s for meat production. Their name is derived from the Dutch word &quot;Boer&quot; meaning farmer. The Boer goat was probably bred from the indigenous goats of the Namaqua Bushmen and the Fooku tribes, with some crossing of Indian and European bloodlines being possible. They were selected for meat rather than milk production; due to selective breeding and improvement, the Boer goat has a fast growth rate and excellent carcass qualities, making it one of the most popular breeds of meat goat in the world. Boer goats have a high resistance to disease and adapt well to hot, dry semi-deserts. United States production is centered in west-central Texas, particularly in and around San Angelo. The original US breeding stock came from herds located in New Zealand. Only later were they imported directly from South Africa.
Boer goats commonly have white bodies and distinctive brown heads. Like the Nubian goat, they possess long, pendulous ears. They are noted for being docile, fast growing, and having high fertility rates. Does are reported to have superior mothering skills as compared to other goats. Mature Boer bucks weigh between 110&lt;U+2013&gt;135 kg (240-300 lb), and mature does between 90&lt;U+2013&gt;100 kg (200-220 lb).
Commercial meat production
 Meat goats are minimal care animals that are browsers by nature, preferring brush, shrubs, and broadleaf weeds rather than grass. Boer goats raised for meat production are typically raised on pastures. The main reasons for this are twofold: pastured goats are on average healthier animals than pen-raised goats; secondly, it costs far less to raise Boer goats on a diet of brush and weeds, than on bags of commercial feed. The ideal option is adequate year-round grazing with only mineral supplementation. Boer goats can be raised effectively in combination with cattle or sheep due to their preference for browse and the resulting limited impact on the grass cover. They do compete with other browsers, such as deer.
Trace minerals, especially copper, are particularly important to good goat health. Feed and mineral blocks marked &quot;for sheep and goats&quot; should be avoided. Copper in quantities suitable for goats is toxic to sheep, so dual sheep/goat feeds will almost always lack sufficient copper for goats. Copper deficiency is known to cause anemia, diarrhea, infertility, spontaneous abortions, and lethargy.
Bucks
 The most critical part of any meat goat operation is the selection of a herd sire (breeding buck). A high quality buck can produce high quality offspring even when mated with an average doe. Boer goats tend to gain weight at about the same rate as their sire, so a buck from a proven fast growing bloodline will command the highest price, as its offspring will tend to also be fast growers. The primary market for slaughter goats is a 22&lt;U+2013&gt;36 kg (50-80 lb) kid; kids should reach marketable size at weaning age. The kid of a proven fast-growing sire might weigh 36 kg (80 lb) at 90 days, while the kid of a poor quality sire might weigh only 15 kg (35 lb) at 90 days. An average quality buck will initially be less expensive to purchase; however, they can significantly undermine an operation's long-term profitability. Other criteria for a breeding buck include:

Jaw alignment &lt;U+2013&gt; most meat goats are raised on pasture. A goat with poor jaw alignment will be at a significant disadvantage when feeding on pasture; poor jaw alignment is not acceptable in a commercial herd sire.


Good feet and legs: needed to move about the pasture. Hoof rot is a common problem for goats that live in high rain areas if the hooves are not clipped regularly.


Two well formed equal-size testes in a single scrotum: the main purpose of a buck is to breed does.

For breeding purposes, one buck is normally required for every 25-35 does. Under ideal conditions the ratio can be as high as one buck for every 50 does. Bucks are normally separated from the does except for when breeding is specifically intended. Often does are bred for six weeks every 8 months, resulting in three kid crops every two years.
Successful bucks must be able to survive on pasture. Pen-raised bucks will stay near their pen, while the does they are supposed to breed are out in the pasture.
Does
Does used to breed show quality goats are normally very large, as show goats are expected to be of large stature. For commercial meat production medium size does are normally preferred as they produce the same number of kids, but require less feed to do so.  As a general rule the more kids born per doe, the greater profit margins for the owner. Boer goats are polyestrous (they can breed throughout the year), and they reach sexual maturity at 5 months of age. A typical breeding program is to produce 3 kid crops every 2 years; meaning the does are pregnant for 5 months, nurse their kids for 3 months, and then are rebred. Multiple births are common and a 200% kid crop is achievable in managed herds. Usually first time does will have one kid, but it is possible for them to have more. After that, they will have an average of two kids each time.
Weaning size is largely controlled by how much milk the mother produces, along with how long she allows each kid to nurse. Does weaning large kids should be kept, those weaning small to medium kids should be removed from the herd.
The presence of a buck causes does to come into estrus (heat), which lasts about 24&lt;U+2013&gt;36 hours. The gestation period for does varies from 149 to 155 days.
Boer does are normally very good mothers, requiring only minimal attention from the owner; however, this is not always true when a doe delivers her very first kid. First time does should be supervised, as the mothering instinct may not manifest itself the first time she delivers. After the first time, Boer does normally make excellent mothers. If after that a doe does not present herself to have &quot;mothering instincts&quot;, it is best not to keep her.
Cross breeding
 While purebred bucks are usually preferred for breeding purposes, it is common to use crossbreed does for kid production, with the resulting offspring being 7/8 or more Boer. Common crosses are Boer x Spanish goat, Boer x Angora goat, Boer x Kiko goat, and Boer x Nubian goat.
Percentage Boer goats are very common in commercial meat herds, and with those just starting out in the Boer goat business due to ease of acquisition and affordability. Over time, percentage animals can be bred up to American purebred status. An American purebred is a Boer goat of 15/16ths Boer blood (F4) for does and 31/32nds blood (F5) for Boer bucks. Bucks must be one generation of Boer breeding higher than does to achieve this status because they have the potential to spread their genetic pool much further than any single doe; a higher level of Boer blood lessens the chances of other breed qualities in the offspring. American purebreds can never be registered as Fullblood (FB), many breeders will still use a good American Purebred buck with excellent results.
Many producers still prefer purebred or fullblood bucks and does, and intentional crossbreeding is far from universal.
Note: The 'F' designation is the commonly used shorthand for indicating the percentage of pure blood (boer in this case) resulting from cross breeding of a Pureblood boer buck with does of other breeds:

F1 : 1/2 boer blood (Pureblood buck sire, other breed doe)
F2 : 3/4 boer blood (Pureblood buck sire, F1 doe)
F3 : 7/8 boer blood (Pureblood buck sire, F2 doe)
F4 : 15/16 boer blood (Pureblood buck sire, F3 doe)
F5 : 31/32 boer blood (Pureblood buck sire, F4 doe)

Show goats
 Although Boer goats raised specifically for show purposes may seem to have little in common with pastured commercial goats, the difference is superficial. They are bred to be larger than normal goats, and meet specific visual appearances, but these very characteristics are valuable genes to add to the commercial herd. Boer goats were originally imported into the US and other countries for this very reason. Their value to ranchers lies in the improvement the addition of their unique genes can offer any breed of goats being raised for meat. Few producers could afford to maintain a herd of essentially useless animals. Show goats are bred to represent the most desirable characteristics of the Boer goat. And their main purpose is to introduce these animals to the public. It is also a method of recognizing the best of the best, although some really superior goats are not shown due to owner preference. Bucks and does that have been bred for show can be and often are used for commercial breeding stock.1 To show, most Boer goats have to be registered with either the ABGA, IBGA, or USBGA.
Horns
The horns on a boer goat act as a &quot;cooling mechanism&quot; that connect to the sinus cavities at the head. The vascularity of the horn contributes to the regulation of body temperature in boer goats. The circulation of blood to the horn influence the temperature of the brain. Horns are mostly used to scratch with and are not used aggressively. Goats do use them to spar with each other during play fights but this does not lead to any injury. The goats horns are not used against people.
Popular Culture
On April 14, 2010, Zynga Games added the Boer Goat as an adoptable animal in their FarmVille game. In the game the only way to get a Boer Goat is to adopt it from one of your FarmVille neighbour's Facebook newsfeed. If you &quot;find&quot; the Boer Goat on your farm you cannot keep it for yourself.
See also

Goat

References

External links

South African Boer Goat Klub
Comparison of kids with varying percentages of Boer parentage
Tall Corn Meat Goat Wether Association
Iowa Meat Goat Association
American Boer Goat Association
United States Boer Goat Association
International Boer Goat Association
American Meat Goat Association (AMGA)
Information on the Boer Goat from South Africa
The Boer and Meat Goat Information Centre
Meat goat production in Georgia
Meat Goat Breeds and Breeding Plans
Meat Goat Performance Test - Angelo State University

ar:&lt;U+0645&gt;&lt;U+0627&gt;&lt;U+0639&gt;&lt;U+0632&gt; &lt;U+0627&gt;&lt;U+0644&gt;&lt;U+0628&gt;&lt;U+0648&gt;&lt;U+0631&gt; de:Burenziege fr:Ch&lt;U+00E8&gt;vre Boer it:Capra boera nl:Boergeit no:Boergeit pl:Koza burska sl:Burska koza sr:&lt;U+0411&gt;&lt;U+0443&gt;&lt;U+0440&gt;&lt;U+0441&gt;&lt;U+043A&gt;&lt;U+0430&gt; &lt;U+043A&gt;&lt;U+043E&gt;&lt;U+0437&gt;&lt;U+0430&gt;
Category:Goat breeds Category:Meat goat breeds Category:Goat breeds originating in South Africa



Bowman, Gail, Raising Meat Goats for Profit 0967038103↩


