Sammy Going South, retitled A Boy Ten Feet Tall for its later US release, is a 1963 British adventure film directed by Alexander Mackendrick, photographed by Erwin Hillier, and starring Edward G. Robinson, Fergus McClelland and Constance Cummings.1
Ten-year-old Sammy (Fergus McClelland) lives in Port Said, Egypt, with his parents. When they are killed in a bombing during the Suez Crisis, the boy flees the city in the ensuing panic. He sets out to reach his only living relative, an aunt who lives 5000 miles to the south in Durban, South Africa--on the other side of the continent and in a different hemisphere. Along his journey Sammy encounters a colorful array of characters. His first &quot;guide&quot; is an Arab peddler who dies in a freak accident. Sammy is then &quot;rescued&quot; by wealthy tourist Gloria van Imhoff (Constance Cummings). When she wants to return him to Port Said, Sammy runs off and encounters a crusty old hunter/diamond smuggler, Cocky Wainwright (Edward G. Robinson), whose life is subsequently saved by the boy. When the police search for Sammy, they arrest the old man, who has been a fugitive for years. After Sammy is finally united with his Aunt Jane (Zena Walker), he learns that the old smuggler left him his entire fortune. As Cocky Wainwright, Edward G. Robinson gave &quot;one of the subtlest performances of his later career.&quot;2 Chosen for 1963's Royal Film Performance.3 and nominated for a BAFTA Film Award for best British cinematography in 1964, the film had a difficult production period; Robinson suffered a heart attack and cast members were bitten by snakes.4
The film was based on a novel by W.H. Canaway and adapted for the screen by Denis Cannan. It was produced by Michael Balcon Productions and Bryanston Films. It was first broadcast on American television by the American Broadcasting Company (ABC) in 1971.
Cast

Edward G. Robinson - Cocky Wainwright
Fergus McClelland - Sammy Hartland
Constance Cummings - Gloria van Imhoff
Harry H. Corbett - Lem
Paul Stassino - Spyros Dracandopolous
Zia Mohyeddin - The Syrian
Orlando Martins - Abu Lubaba
John Turner - Heneker
Zena Walker - Aunt Jane
Jack Gwillim - District Commissioner
Patricia Donahue - Kathy
Jared Allen - Bob
Guy Deghy - Doctor
Marne Maitland - Hassan
Steven Scott - Egyptian Policeman

References

External links




Category:1963 films Category:1960s adventure films Category:British films Category:English-language films Category:Suez Crisis films



http://ftvdb.bfi.org.uk/sift/title/49323↩
Julian Upton, Movimail Catalogue, July 2010, p.13↩
Moviemail Film Catalogue, July 2010↩
Mark Duguid &quot;Sammy Going South (1963)&quot;, BFI screenonline↩


