
The Sutton Wick air disaster occurred on 5 March 1957, when a Blackburn Beverley C.Mk 1 heavy transport aircraft, serial number XH117, of 53 Squadron Royal Air Force, crashed in the village of Sutton Wick, Berkshire,1 England, near RAF Abingdon following the failure of two of its four engines.2 After take-off, the No. 1 engine failed, and shortly before impact, whilst on final approach back to Abingdon, No. 2 engine failed to respond to throttle inputs. The aeroplane was unable to reach RAF Abingdon and struck cables and trees 18 minutes after lifting off.
Of the 17 passengers and 5 crew on board, all but 4 died in the accident. A subsequent investigation found that a valve in the fuel system had been installed backwards, causing the engines to be starved of fuel.3 Those found responsible for fitting the valve were charged under the Air Force Act.4 Two men who participated in the rescue efforts following the crash were highly praised for &quot;refusing to give up while there was hope of finding survivors among the wreckage.&quot;5 Following the accident, the design of the valve that had been installed incorrectly was changed so they could not physically be installed backwards.
Flight history
In the House of Commons of the United Kingdom, the Secretary of State for Air, George Ward, stated that the crash took place on 5 March 1957. The Beverley departed RAF Abingdon,6 a base that had been used as a training station for RAF Bomber Command throughout the Second World War, bound for RAF Akrotiri in Cyprus. On the day of the crash, the aeroplane was carrying freight, a relief crew and eight RAF policemen with their dogs. Eighteen minutes into the flight, as the aircraft was ascending, the No. 1 engine on the aeroplane's port wing developed a fuel leak. The flight crew responded by feathering the engine, a process that involves rotating the propeller blades parallel to the airflow in order to reduce drag on the airframe and increase efficiency.7 The flight crew declared an emergency and requested a blind approach back to RAF Abingdon, upon which the controller in contact with the aeroplane alerted emergency services on the ground.8 A short time later, cockpit instruments alerted the flight crew to a large loss of fuel from the No. 2 fuel tank—which was powering engine No.1—the second of four such tanks in the port wing of the aeroplane.9 In an effort to stop the leak, the crew deactivated the fuel cocks and boosters for the No. 2 tank, but left them on for the No. 1 tank on the port side.10
As the Beverley turned on to the final approach for RAF Abingdon, the crew applied power to the remaining three Bristol Centaurus engines, but No. 2 engine&lt;U+2014&gt;also on the port wing&lt;U+2014&gt;failed to respond, and the aeroplane began to lose speed and height. Knowing he could not make the airfield the captain tried to land the aircraft in an open field. However, the aircraft became uncontrollable and struck a number of high tension cables11, some trees, which ripped the port side wing from the fuselage, and impacted with the ground.12 The aircraft destroyed a caravan and a pre-fabricated house before somersaulting and landing upside down.13 The aircraft crashed at 11:00 am,14 18 minutes after take-off,15 near the village of Sutton Wick,  south of Abingdon.16 Upon impact, the aircraft, which was carrying a large amount of fuel for the flight to Cyprus, instantly caught fire.17 Although 2 civilians on the ground who were in the pre-fabricated building,18 3 crew, 15 passengers,19 and a number of RAF Police dogs20 were killed in the initial impact and the post-crash fire, 4 survived: 2 crew and 2 passengers.21
Investigation
 A Board of Inquiry investigated the crash and found that the accident was caused by the loss of power from the No. 1 and No. 2 engines,22 both mounted on the port wing of the aircraft. George Ward told the House Of Commons that &quot;the four fuel tanks on the port side of the Beverley feed into a collector box from which the two port engines are fed. From the available evidence, including inspections of part of the aircraft's fuel system, it is clear that a non-return valve between No. 1 (port) tank and the collector box had been fitted in reverse and that the fuel supply from Nos. 3 and 4 (port) tanks were switched off throughout the flight.&quot; Ward continued, saying that the loss of power from No. 1 was caused by it being feathered as a precautionary measure and the fuel starvation to No. 2 engine was caused by an incorrectly fitted non-return valve in the supply line from No. 1 fuel tank.23 No. 2 fuel tank had been isolated and two smaller fuel tanks in the port wing had not been selected during the flight.24
The tradesman who had fitted the valve, and his supervisor, were prosecuted and charged,25 but a court found that they were not guilty of the main charge.26 The Board also noted that some fuel was available from the two smaller tanks, which were not used during the flight, and that the captain &quot;must bear some responsibility&quot; for not using those tanks.27 Ward said however that &quot;owing to the nature of the flight the amount of fuel in the two smaller tanks was not large, and it can only be assumed that the captain had no reason to believe that both port engines would not operate satisfactorily off the two main port tanks individually.&quot;28 The captain lost his life in the accident, and no charges were brought against him or any of the flight crew.
Aftermath
As a consequence of the disaster at Sutton Wick, the design of the incorrectly installed fuel valve was changed, so such an error would be impossible.29 Aviation author Graham Perry wrote that, following the crash, &quot;airworthiness design standards were changed so that the threads at either end of all such valved manufactured since are now made totally different from each other. Items like a non-return valve simply cannot now be assembled in the wrong sense.&quot;30 Nevertheless, Perry wrote, &quot;[one] would be amazed how many people have still tried to do so in the forty-seven years since, most realising their mistake after looking in the manual and quietly and ruefully thanking those who had gone before them and made it impossible.&quot;31
Reverend Stanley Harrison, the station padre at RAF Abingdon, was appointed an Officer of the Order of the British Empire (OBE) and Flying Officer Charles Evans, the medical officer, a Member of the Order of the British Empire (MBE) for efforts in the rescue of the crew.3233 They were involved in the three-hour rescue effort, removing fourteen bodies from the wreckage, and, after half an hour they found an RAF Police dog alive.34 The RAF praised the two men for displaying &quot;courage and resourcefulness of a high order, refusing to give up while there was hope of finding survivors among the wreckage.&quot;35 Also singled out for attention by the Board of Inquiry was a Mrs Smith of Abingdon, and the efforts of the Berkshire Constabulary were praised by investigators.36
See also


List of accidents and incidents involving military aircraft (1950&lt;U+2013&gt;1959)
Air safety
1957 in aviation

References
Notes

Bibliography











Category:Aviation accidents and incidents in 1957 Category:Aviation accidents and incidents in the United Kingdom Category:Accidents and incidents involving the Blackburn Beverley Category:Accidents and incidents involving Royal Air Force aircraft



Now part of Oxfordshire↩




Halley 2001 p. 39↩












↩






Perry 2004 p. 52↩




Perry 2004 p. 53↩
↩
↩


↩


