

The Holden VR Commodore of July 1993 came with an updated, sleeker and more modern design, as well as safety enhancements such as anti-lock brakes (ABS). From the side, the biggest change was the use of a round rear wheelarch, instead of a squared-off shape used on the previous two Commodores. The VR Acclaim and Calais included a driver's side air bag, being a first for an Australian car, although ABS brakes and independent rear suspension (IRS) were only available with an automatic transmission. The rear-end treatment saw raised tail lamps, which were recessed high up on the boot lid for safety reasons. A new electronic version of the Turbo-Hydramatic 700R4 (TH700) automatic transmission was introduced, known as the GM 4L60-E. The VR Commodore was Wheels Car of the Year for 1993.
Toyota Lexcen
 
The United Australian Automobile Industries (UAAI) joint venture agreement with Toyota Australia first starting with the VN Commodore continued with the VR. The VR Lexcen was introduced at or about the same time as the other VR models; featuring subtle styling differences, particularly, the front panels. This was due to Toyota specifying styling that was in common with the then new &quot;wide body&quot; Camry. However this strategy was not a success and Lexcen sales were still quite low, also another factor in this is Holden restricted Toyota in the number of Lexcens it was to provide to them.
Specification levels
Commodore Executive
Commodore Acclaim
WIth the introduction of the VR Commodore came the introduction of the Acclaim specification level&lt;U+2014&gt;a safety pack that was aimed at families and situated one notch above the Executive in the specification hierarchy. The Acclaim featured ABS brakes, IRS, driver's side airbag and cruise control as standard.
Commodore S
Commodore SS
Commodore Berlina
Calais
Faults

The VR series vehicles are quite rugged and reliable with few major problems. The V6 engine is long lasting and most of them are running around with an average of + on the original motor. The transmissions are strong and long lasting, but need be serviced according to manufacturer's specifications to ensure long life. Oil leaks are common from the engine, as in earlier VN and VP models, but this a seldom a problem if the leaks are small and the vehicle is maintained. Paint work is known to oxidize badly, this is due to the antiquated paint processes used by Holden at the time.

nl:Holden VR
Category:Australian cars VR Category:Full-size vehicles Category:Rear wheel drive vehicles Category:Sedans Category:Station wagons Category:Vehicles introduced in 1993
