
Eno River State Park is a 3,900 acre (15.78 km&lt;U+00B2&gt;) North Carolina state park in Durham and Orange Counties, North Carolina in the United States. It is near Durham, North Carolina along the banks of the Eno River. Together with the adjoining West Point on the Eno city park, the two parks preserve over 9 miles (15 km) of the river in its natural habitat.
History
Native Americans of the Eno, Shakori and Occoneechee tribes lived along the river prior to European settlement. Some of the tribes merged in the late 17th century and established a village near present-day Durham. Settlers moved to the area later to set up farms and gristmills. More than 30 mills were located along the length of the Eno.
Efforts to establish Eno River State Park started in 1965 when the city of Durham proposed building a reservoir in the river valley. A group of concerned citizens led a campaign to save the Eno and formed the Association for the Preservation of the Eno River Valley. The association proposed the establishment of a state park and, in May of 1972, the state of North Carolina approved the idea. The city of Durham withdrew its efforts to construct the reservoir. In 1975, the state&lt;U+2014&gt;with help from the Eno River Association and the Nature Conservancy&lt;U+2014&gt;acquired more than 1,000 acres (4 km&lt;U+00B2&gt;) of land for the park.
The Eno River Association
 Established in 1966, the Eno River Association has bought and protected more than 4900 acres (20 km&lt;U+00B2&gt;) of land since that time. Along with protecting the plants and wildlife, the association also attempts to teach people about the natural environment and conservation. The Association also produces the Festival for the Eno.1
Points of interest
Fish Dam Road
In the 17th century, Fish Dam Road connected an Indian village on the Eno River with an Indian village on the Neuse River. When European settlers first came to the area, the road became a trail for horses, mules, and wagons. The road connected eastern Durham County (then Orange County), to Hillsborough, at one point the road even had its own post office. Nowadays, Fish Dam Road is a hiking trail, although parts of the road came to form what is now parts of US 70 and Hillsborough Road.23
Occoneechee Speedway

Occoneechee Speedway was the second NASCAR track to ever open. Retired in 1968, it is the only track remaining from NASCAR's first season in 1949.4 Although originally it was just farmland, the owner of the land raced horses and built a track for him to practice. While piloting his airplane, Bill France, Sr. noticed the track and the farmland, and soon increased the track to .5 The track soon became a big part of NASCAR with racers like Louise Smith and Richard Petty participating. Many local authorities did not like the track and eventually France was pressured to shut it down.6 Occoneeche Speedway is now a historic area with over three miles (5 km) of trails.7
West Point on the Eno

Although West Point on the Eno was once an area where local Indians fished, hunted, and grew crops, it's better known as a community that thrived on the many mills in the area. White settlers who originally came to the area were impressed by the fresh water and decided to build mills to harvest this. Michael Synott built the first mill, he was soon followed by many other entrepreneurs. Since then, the community of West Point has died out. Today it is both a historical site displaying the 18th and 19th century mills and a city park that covers 388 acres (1.6 km&lt;U+00B2&gt;) on the banks of the Eno River.8
West Point Mill

West Point Mill is perhaps the most famous mill in West Point on the Eno. Originally built in 1780 by William Thetford and Charles Abercrom-bie, it ran for 160 years before being retired in 1942. It is one of the last surviving mills in the area and is open for visitors both to see how it worked and to visit the gift shop.
Trails
General Rules
Although Eno River State Park and its trails are public places, there are rules that visitors must be aware of. No bicycles or motorized vehicles are allowed on the trails. Dogs must be on a leash, fires are only allowed in specific parts of picnic areas, and trash must be put in a trash can. Camping requires both a permit and a fee. Alcohol is not permitted at the park. Rangers are strict about this and not only will they make you pour the alcohol out, but they will require you to leave the park as well.
Trail Descriptions
Buckquarter Creek
Beginning at the parking lot for the Piper-Cox Museum, the Buckquarter Creek Trail goes up the river at Few's Ford. A staircase takes visitors to a view of the Eno River rapids down below. This  loop is marked by red dots. Holden Mill loop and the Ridge Trail branch off from the Buckquarter Creek Trail.
Cabelands
The Cabelands Trail is  long and is marked by red dots. The trail passes through the few remains of the Cabe Mill. The stretch of the river is very rocky and usually known as Cabe's Gorge. 
Cox Mountain
The Cox Mountain Trail is marked by blue dots this  trip passes a picnic area and crosses the suspension foot bridge. The trail goes up  in elevation and at one point follows Hillsborough Coach Road. When getting closer to Cox Mountain, the trail can get fairly steep. From this trail you can go onto Fanny's Ford trail.
Eno Quarry
Eno Quarry Trail is marked by blue dots and is a  loop. In the 60's, stone was removed from the Eno Quarry Trail to aid in construction of Interstate 85. Since then a  pond has built up in that area. The trail has several spots that are good for fishing.
Eno Trace
Eno Trace is a nature trail with various information stations pointing out wildlife along the way. There is a short set of steps along the way and at one point the trail follows alongside the river.
Fanny's Ford
Fanny's Ford Trail is a  loop and is mostly made up of flat ground and gentle hills. The trail is around the Cox Mountain trail and Hillsborough Coach Road, and at one point passes through the Few Mill's race. The trail is marked by purple dots.
Holden Mill
The Holden Mill trail is a combination of two loops and is  long. The larger eastern loop follows the river bank for almost a mile, before climbing a  rise in elevation. The smaller loop is a hike around the remains of Holden's Mill, but also follows the river at parts. It is marked by yellow dots. 
Shakori
The Shakori Trail is a scenic  hike marked by yellow U's. Hikers can view the remains of a 19th century house and an old saw mill site. At one point there is a  rise in elevation.
Laurel Bluffs
This trail starts at an intersection with the Pump Station Trail and goes east to Guess Road. It is 2.49 miles long and generally stays close to the river except for short sections where cliffs and bluffs force it up and around on ridges. Along the way the trail passes the chimney and foundation of an old hunting lodge, the mostly intact Guess Mill Dam, enters the millrace and comes out at the chimney at the Guess Mill site. Future plans are for Laurel Bluffs Trail to extend west to Cabelands Trail and to connect with West Point on the Eno city park trails to serve as a component of North Carolina&lt;U+2019&gt;s Mountains to Sea Trail.
Pump Station
The Pump Station Trail is known as the best spring wildflower trail in the park. It begins at the Nancy Rhodes Creek bridge on Rivermont Road and makes a 1.5 mile loop. It is generally an easy hike with only a few gentle hills. The foundations of Durham&lt;U+2019&gt;s first water pumping station are at the northeast section of the loop near the river. The unusually long and narrow Coon Foot Island can be viewed while hiking beside the river.
Festival for the Eno
The Eno River is well-known for the Festival for the Eno which on average brings 30,000 visitors to the river on the three-day event in July. As of 2010, the festival celebrates its 31st year. The festival includes music, crafts, food, and environmental awareness. All proceeds go to the conservation of the Eno River and surrounding areas. In fact, the festival has helped to secure protection of over 5,000 acres (20 km&lt;U+00B2&gt;) over the years.910
Nearby State Parks

William B. Umstead State Park

References



fr:Parc d'&lt;U+00C9&gt;tat d'Eno River
Category:Protected areas established in 1975 Category:North Carolina state parks Category:Durham County, North Carolina Category:Orange County, North Carolina




↩
↩
↩
↩
↩

↩
↩
↩


