
Edith Jeanette Soterius von Sachsenheim (1887&lt;U+2013&gt;1970) was a Transylvanian Saxon painter.
She was born on 26 December 1887, in Marienburg (today Feldioara), the daughter of Dr. med. Arthur Soterius von Sachsenheim (from the Trasylvanian Saxon noble family Soterius von Sachsenheim) and of Wilhelmina, n&lt;U+00E9&gt;e Gust. From an early age, she displayed artistic talent in painting and her parents supported her wish to follow a career in this field. After completing a two-year course (1903&lt;U+2013&gt;04) at Hermannstadt Art College, her father brought her to stay with relatives in England, where she spent one year (1904&lt;U+2013&gt;05) taking up English and art classes. She was granted permission by the National Gallery to copy museum works, and here she developed an interest in Turner's watercolours, a visible influence in her early works, as well as in a later period, from 1948.1  In 1907, her father decided that she should continue her studies in Munich, where she enrolled at the Royal College of Art and Crafts and developed an interest in portrait art. A year later, she began visiting the artistic circle of Professor Moritz Heymann, where she met artists that had a close affinity to the Jugend group. Edith's works dating back to this period, e.g. Sitzender Halbakt (&quot;Seated Semi-Nude&quot;) or the portrait of her friend Eleanor Garrett-Ward, reflect her ambition to overcome the dated artistic conceptions of the academy. In these, as in all the other works of this creative period, there appear elegant, flowing lines and the decorative extensive colourings of Art Nouveau.2
In 1911, Edith returned to Transylvania (when she had her first exhibition at Bra&lt;U+0219&gt;ov Galleries). In 1912, she married Dr. med. Franz Herfurth and she moved together with him in Austria, where she spent the First World War years, managing to paint some watercolours. She became the mother of three children, Editha, G&lt;U+00FC&gt;nther and Eva. The family obligations limited for some decades her artistic pursuits. In her next creations, she gave up any form of modernism and confined herself to a strictly objective, realistic representation of her subject. The marriage did not last; they divorced in 1926 and in the next year she married her childhood friend, Professor Ludwig Herbert. However he was also not conducive to her artistic work and Edith continued being a mother and started doing some work as an English teacher.3
Ludwig died in 1936 and in 1938 Edith decided to move to south Germany to be near her daughters who were living there; this brought on a new phase in her artwork. Up to 1946 she taught art in various schools and painted in her spare time. In January 1946, her son G&lt;U+00FC&gt;nther died and in August the same year she moved her eldest daughter in Graz, Austria. Another creative phase followed in 1948, when she produced a series of watercolours in the areas of Graz and Zurich. These works are influenced to some extent by her aforementioned early encounter with Turner's art. In 1952, a landscape watercolour won the silver prize at Foyles Bookshop International Artists Competition.
 In 1955, she moved to Britain, to live with her daughter Eva. There, she painted portraits (including those of her daughter's family) and views from the area of Hampstead. In 1957, Edith submitted and had exhibited the drawing A little girl from Krakow at the Royal Society of Portrait Painters. The exhibition travelled all around the country. 4
Edith died in 1970, at the age of 83. In her lifetime, she created around 200 paintings, drawings and lithographs, now in several museums or in possession of friends and relatives across Europe. In 1998, the Transylvanian Museum from Gundelsheim, Germany staged a retrospective exhibition and bought 50 of her paintings, some of which are on permanent display in the museum. In 1999, The Gundelsheim collection was exhibited in Munich at the Haus des Deutschen Ostens. In 2001, the Military History Museum of Vienna bought three portraits of World War One officers, to be displayed there.5
Art contemporaries and friends

Arthur Coulin: A friend from Sibiu, he did an oil-painting of Edith in 1907 in Sibiu when she was 19 years old. The portrait is in the Gundelsheim Museum.
Ernst Honigberger: A friend from Sibiu also studying in Munich, he did a pencil drawing of Edith, aged 20, in 1908. This is now in the Gundelsheim Museum.
Robert Wellman: A friend from Sibiu, became a family friend and did a portrait of Edith's father Arthur Soterius von Sachsenheim. This is in the family home in London, England.
Trude Schullerus: A friend from Sibiu also studied in Munich, remained a friend of the family for life.

References

External links

Several paintings by Edith Soterius von Sachsenheim



Category:1887 births Category:1970 deaths Category:Academy of Fine Arts, Munich alumni Category:Austrian watercolourists Category:Deaths in London Category:People from Transylvania Category:Transylvanian-Saxon people



↩






