 Henry Manners, 2nd Earl of Rutland, 14th Baron de Ros of Helmsley, KG (23 September 1526 – 17 September 1563) was the son of Thomas Manners, 1st Earl of Rutland. He also held the title of 14th Baron de Ros of Hamlake, a title to which he acceded in 1543. The Earl's mother was Eleanor Paston. On 3 July 1536, he married Margaret Neville, daughter of Ralph Neville, 4th Earl of Westmorland, and they had three children:

Edward Manners, 3rd Earl of Rutland
John Manners, 4th Earl of Rutland
Elizabeth Manners (c. 1553 – c. 1590) she married Sir William Courtenay of Powderham Castle.

After Margaret's death, he married Bridget, the widow of Richard Morrison. Her third husband was Francis Russell, 2nd Earl of Bedford.
Like his father, Earl Henry held many offices. As Warden of the Scottish Marches he reprieved the town of Haddington in June 1549, and recaptured Ferniehirst Castle.1 Whilst anxious to return home on account of his mother's ill-health in November 1549, he was required to investigate the activities of Thomas Wyndham a sailor who had captured merchant vessels in the Forth. In December 1549, his mother-in-law, the Dowager of Westmorland, complained to him that he had established a garrison of Italian soldiers at Bywell, one her villages.2 As Captain-general of the cavalry at the siege of St Quentin under Mary I of England. Under Elizabeth I he served successfully and she made him Lord Lieutenant of Nottinghamshire and Rutland, Knight of the Garter and President of the North. Not long before his premature death he completed the building of Belvoir Castle.
He is buried at Bottesford Church in Leicestershire. His tomb, in the centre of the chancel next to that of his father, is of alabaster and considered unique. The effigies lie beneath a decorated example of an Elizabethan dining table on heavy carved legs, suggesting an attempt to represent a communion table. Earl Henry is depicted in armour of conventional pattern except that the breast plate is made up of laminated plates. He wears a coronet and his head is supported on a tilt-heaume. He is wearing a chain nearly reaching his thighs, and the Order of the Garter is on the left leg. He holds a closed book in his right hand and a sword in his left. At his feet is a hornless unicorn. His wife, Margaret, also wears a coronet and is dressed in the style of the time, with an ermine-trimmed mantle. Her head rests on a scroll and her feet on a lion.
References


Historical Manuscripts Commission, 12th Report, Appendix part 4, Manuscripts of the Duke of Rutland at Belvoir Castle, vol. 1(1888)
familysearch.org Accessed 2 June 2007
stirnet.com Accessed 2 June 2007






|-  


Category:1526 births Category:1563 deaths Category:Earls in the Peerage of England 02 14 Category:Knights of the Garter Category:People of the Tudor period Category:Lord-Lieutenants of Nottinghamshire Category:Lord-Lieutenants of Rutland Category:Lord-Lieutenants of Lincolnshire Category:The Rough Wooing H Category:16th-century English people



Merriman, Marcus, The Rough Wooings, Tuckwell (2000), 340.↩
HMC (1888), 50, 52, 53.↩


