
Bethel High School is located in Spanaway, Washington. It is Bethel School District's oldest high school, dating back to 1952 .
Academics
For world languages, Bethel offers four years of French and Spanish, as well as three years of German. AP classes offered are Statistics, Calculus, Psychology, Literature and Composition, Language and Composition, Government and Politics, and Biology.
Activities
ASB, Speech/Debate, Dance/Drill, Choir (Concert Choir), Band (Concert Band, Pep Band, Wind Ensemble, and Jazz Band), Orchestra, Next Level Campus, DECA, Drama, FBLA, FCCLA, French Club, German Club, National Honor Society, Key Club, Native American Club, Natural Helpers, SAFTYE, S.A.V.E, Spanish Club, AFJROTC and United Cultural Congress.
Athletics
Bethel is part of the Bethel School District along with Spanaway Lake High School and Graham-Kapowsin High School. Bethel competes in the South Division of the 4A South Puget Sound league in Washington's West Central District.
JROTC
Bethel High School hosts an Air Force JROTC (AFJROTC) course, much like its sister high schools (GKHS with Army JROTC, Spanaway-Lake with Navy JROTC).
Sports
The mascot is the Braves.
Recent team state tournament results:

Boys Basketball - 1st in 2005
Volleyball - 1st in 1996

Other sports are soccer, girls basketball, cross country, track and field, swim and dive, baseball, fastpitch softball, tennis, golf, wrestling, football, track and bowling. It has cheerleading and a dance/drill team.
History

A speech given during the 1983 ASB Elections resulted in disciplinary action against the orator, Matthew Fraser, who then filed a lawsuit against the school district in an effort to defend the First Amendment right of free speech for students in public schools. The case was eventually taken up by the Supreme Court of the United States of America in Bethel School District v. Fraser 478 U.S. 675 (1986), who upheld the decision of Bethel High School administrators in punishing Fraser.
Notable alumni

Mike Blowers, MLB player 1989-1999, broadcaster
Corey Belser, NBA European player. 2006 CI NCCA Defensive POY
Derrike Cope, NASCAR Driver 1982-Current 1990 Daytona 500 Winner
LeiLani Jones, Miss Washington USA 2007
Steve Dildine, NFL player
Rick Story, UFC fighter
Jerry Cantrell, musician and songwriter with Alice in Chains 1987&lt;U+2013&gt;present

See also

Graham-Kapowsin High School
Spanaway Lake High School
Challenger High School

References

Daffodil Festival Queens


Category:High schools in Pierce County, Washington Category:South Puget Sound League Category:Public high schools in Washington (state)
