
Eucalyptus tereticornis is a species of tree native to eastern Australia.
It has a great many common names, of which Forest Red Gum is perhaps the most widely known. Other common names include Bastard Box, Blue Gum, Flooded Gum, Grey Gum, Mountain Gum, Queensland Blue Gum, Red Gum, Red Ironbark, Red Irongum and Slaty Gum.1
Description
It grows to a height of from 20 to 50 metres, and a girth of up to 2 metres dbh. The trunk is straight, and is usually unbranched for more than half of the total height of the tree. Thereafter, limbs are unusually steeply inclined for a Eucalyptus species. The bark is shed in irregular sheets, resulting in a smooth trunk surface coloured in patches of white, grey and blue, corresponding to areas that shed their bark at different times.2
It has narrow, lanceolate green leaves, from 10 to 20 centimetres long, and one to nearly three centimetres wide. Flowers occur in inflorescences of seven to 11 flowers.3
Taxonomy
Specimens of E. tereticornis were first collected by First Fleet surgeon and naturalist John White from Port Jackson in 1793, and published later that year by James Edward Smith in Zoology and Botany of New Holland.4 It was later republished by Smith in his 1795 edition of A Specimen of the Botany of New Holland.5 Smith gave it the specific epithet tereticornis from the Latin teretus (&quot;terete&quot;, meaning circular in transverse cross-section) and cornu (&quot;horn&quot;), in reference to the horn-shaped bud cap.6
It has had a fairly complex taxonomic history. Synonyms include:7

Eucalyptus tereticornis var. pruiniflora (Blakely) Cameron
Eucalyptus insignis Naudin
Eucalyptus populifolia Desf.
Eucalyptus subulata Schauer
Eucalyptus umbellata (Gaertn.) Domin nom. illeg.
Eucalyptus umbellata var. pruiniflora Blakely
Leptospermum umbellatum Gaertn.

There have also been numerous subspecies and varieties published, but the only ones that remain current are E. tereticornis subsp. mediana and the autonym E. tereticornis subsp. tereticornis. Some hybrids have been reported.8
Distribution and habitat
This species has a wide distribution, occurring over the widest range of latitudes of any Eucalyptus species: from southern Papua New Guinea at latitude 15&lt;U+00B0&gt;S, to southeastern Victoria at latitude 38&lt;U+00B0&gt;C.9
Uses
E. tereticornis has a strong, hard and durable heartwood, with a density of about 1100 kg m-3. It is used for construction in heavy engineering, such as for railway sleepers.10
References


es:Eucalyptus tereticornis
Tereticornis Category:Myrtales of Australia Category:Trees of Australia Category:Flora of New South Wales Category:Flora of Queensland



↩
↩


↩
↩
↩





