
Fort Lauderdale Station is a train station in Fort Lauderdale, Broward County, Florida, which is served by Tri-Rail and Amtrak. The station is located on Southwest 21st Terrace, just south of West Broward Boulevard.
History
 The original station, which is used by Amtrak, is a former Seaboard Air Line Railway depot built in 1927. Designed in the prevalent Mediterranean Revival style by Gustav Maass of the West Palm Beach architectural firm Harvey &amp; Clarke, it is virtually identical to the Hollywood Seaboard station to the south. The station took the place of a temporary structure that had been hastily erected at the end of 1926 to greet the January 1927 arrival of the first Seaboard passenger train in South Florida, the Orange Blossom Special.
The station was served by the Orange Blossom Special until 1953 and, among other Seaboard trains, the Silver Meteor beginning in 1939. Amtrak maintained Silver Meteor service to the station when it took over intercity passenger train service in 1971. Both the Silver Meteor and Amtrak's Silver Star continue to use the station.
The station consists of a passenger waiting room on the northern end and a baggage room in the center section. On the southern end is a freight room, which is used by CSX, the successor to Seaboard. Just south of the street side entry to the passenger waiting room, and representative of the racial segregation laws of the era in which the station was constructed, is the entrance to what had been the &quot;colored&quot; waiting room.
Tri-Rail
On January 9, 1989, the South Florida Regional Transportation Authority began Tri-Rail service to the station, building additional facilities and a pedestrian overpass just north of the original station. A park and ride lot is available, and is directly accessible via a proprietary exit from Interstate 95 north.
Transit connections
BCT



Route #
Route Name
Route Map
Note




22
Central Terminal &lt;U+2194&gt; Sawgrass Mills Mall or West Regional Terminal via Broward Boulevard (SR 824)
Map




Metrobus



Route #
Route Name
Route Map
Note




95
95 Dade/Broward Express (Downtown Miami &lt;U+2194&gt; Downtown Fort Lauderdale via Broward Blvd and I-95)
Map
Weekday rush hour only; limited-stop



Gallery
File:Fort Lauderdale Amtrak.jpg|Fort Lauderdale Amtrak and former Seaboard Air Line Railway Station (left) and Tri-Rail Station (rear) File:Fort Lauderdale SAL station NE.jpg|Northeast view of former Seaboard station File:Fort Lauderdale SAL station SW.jpg|Southwest view of former Seaboard station File:Fort Lauderdale SAL station S.jpg|South view of former Seaboard station File:Ft Lauderdale SAL seg entry.jpg|Separate entrance to the former &quot;colored&quot; waiting room of the station File:Amfleet Silver Star &amp; Tri-Rail in Fort Lauderdale.jpg|Amtrak Silver Star and Tri-Rail side-by-side at Fort Lauderdale Station File:Amfleet Silver Star at Fort Lauderdale Pedestrian Bridge.jpg|The Silver Star beneath a pedestrian bridge
References

External links


1947 photo of Seaboard Air Line steam engine no. 242 leaving Fort Lauderdale
South Florida Regional Transportation Authority - Fort Lauderdale Station
May 1995 Photograph (Amtrak Photo Archive)
Fort Lauderdale Amtrak/Tri-Rail Station (USA Rail Guide -- Train Web)
Station from Google Maps Street View



Category:Tri-Rail in Broward County Category:Amtrak stations in Florida F Category:Railway stations opened in 1927 Category:Economy of Fort Lauderdale, Florida Category:Tri-Rail stations
