
The Lowenstein-Jensen medium, more commonly known as LJ medium, is a growth medium1 specially used for culture of Mycobacterium, notably Mycobacterium tuberculosis.
When grown on LJ medium, M. tuberculosis appears as brown, granular colonies (sometimes called &quot;buff, rough and tough&quot;). The media must be incubated for a significant length of time, usually four weeks, due to the slow doubling time of M. tuberculosis compared with other bacteria (15-20 hours).
Composition
The usual composition2 as applicable to Mycobacterium tuberculosis is:

Malachite green
Glycerol
Asparagine
Potato flour
Coagulated eggs
Mineral salt solution

Potassium dihydrogen phosphate
Magnesium sulfate
Sodium citrate


The original formulation included starch, which was later found to be unnecessary and hence omitted.
Low levels of penicillin and nalidixic acid are also present in LJ medium to inhibit growth of gram positive and gram negative bacteria, in order to limit growth to Mycobacteria species only. Presence of malachite green in the medium inhibits most other bacteria. It is disinfected and solidified by a process of inspissation. Presence of glycerol enhances the growth of Mycobacterium tuberculosis.
If the slopes are made on test tubes they must be stored in cold and used within a month.
For cultivation of M.bovis, glycerol is omitted and sodium pyruvate is added.
The medium appears green, opaque and opalescent.
Uses

For diagnosis of Mycobacterial infections 
For testing antibiotic susceptibility of isolates
For differentiating different species of mycobacterium (by colony morphology, growth rate, biochemical characteristics and microscopy)




Mycobacterium tuberculosis
Mycobacterium Bovis




Eugonic, rough tough and buff
Dysgonic


Aerobic
Microaerophillic


Glycerol enhancement +
Glycerol enhancement -


Pyruvate enhancement +
Pyruvate enhancement -


Niacin production +
Niacin production -



Alternative Culture media
While the LJ medium is the most popular means of culturing Mycobacteria, as recommended by the International Union against Tuberculosis (IUAT), several alternative media have been investigated.3
Solid media

Egg-based - Petragnini medium and Dorset medium
Blood based -Tarshis medium
Serum based - Loeffler medium
Potato based - Pawlowsky medium

Liquid media

Dubos' medium
Middlebrook media
Proskauer and Beck's medium
Sula's medium
Sauton's medium

BACTEC
The BACTEC system is a liquid medium with radiometric growth detection of Mycobacterium which has the advantage of more rapid detection as compared to traditional cultures. Antibiotic susceptibility testing can also be done.
See also

Ziehl-Neelsen stain

References


fr:Lowenstein-Jensen pl:Pod&lt;U+0142&gt;o&lt;U+017C&gt;e L&lt;U+00F6&gt;wensteina-Jensena
Category:Microbiological media



↩
Composition of LJ medium↩
Textbook of Microbiology by Ananthanarayan and Panicker, Sixth Edition↩


