

For the Portuguese island, see S&lt;U+00E3&gt;o Miguel Island.


  San Miguel Island is the westernmost of California's Channel Islands and the sixth-largest of the eight at , including offshore islands and rocks. Prince Island,  off the northeastern coast, measures  in area. The island, at its furthest extent, is  long and  wide. San Miguel Island, together with numerous small islets around it, is defined by the United States Census Bureau as Block 3010, Block Group 3, Census Tract 29.10 of Santa Barbara County, California. The island is uninhabited. 1 Highest peak is San Miguel Hill, at .
San Miguel is part of Channel Islands National Park and lies within Santa Barbara County. This westernmost island receives northwesterly winds and severe weather from the open ocean. The cold and nutrient-rich water surrounding the island is home to a diverse array of sea life that is not found on the southern islands.
Submerged rocks make the nearly  coastline a mariner's nightmare.
History
Archaeological research has shown that San Miguel was first settled by humans at least 12,000 years ago. Because the northern Channel Islands have not been connected to the adjacent mainland in recent geological history, the Paleoindians who first settled the island clearly had boats and other maritime technologies. Rough seas and risky landings did not daunt the Chumash who lived there in later times, nor did they deter the first European explorer, Juan Rodriguez Cabrillo, in 1542&lt;U+2014&gt;it is also rumored to be his burial place (there is a monument there in his honor). Ranchers raised sheep from 1850 to 1948. One of the longest homesteaded Ranchers were the Lesters. A family of four that parted their way from the island during Pearl Harbor due to the dangers the war posed on them. The detailed information was written and published in a book called &quot;The Legendary King of San Miguel Island,&quot; by Elizabeth Sherman Lester. Later, the United States Navy used the island for a bombing range.
Park Service operations
 The National Park Service maintains two airstrips, a ranger station and a research station on the island. The Island is normally staffed by a ranger who enforces park laws, while also providing interpretive services for public visitors. The island also hosts scientists that study pinnipeds and manage the Island Fox captive breeding program that is conducted on the island. Volunteer interpretive rangers often fill in for regularly paid rangers due to budget deficits within the park. Park employees and researchers are flown to the island by Channel Islands Aviation. Public visitors are not permitted to fly in.
Weather
San Miguel Island does not receive protection from the open ocean as the other Channel Islands. Most of the time a strong northwest wind blows across the island. These winds typically exceed  and can surpass . When strong high pressure is over the mainland, the winds often cease.
Heavy fog is common on the island. On warmer days the fog will burn off only to have the strong northwest wind blow in additional fog from the open ocean. On foggy days the temperature will rarely exceed .
Tourism
 Normally fewer than 200 public visitors set foot on San Miguel during a given year.
Visitors are transported by boat to the Island by the Park concessionaire, Island Packers. Eight-foot seas are not uncommon in the Pacific between Santa Rosa Island and San Miguel Island.
Rough seas often result in cancellation of excursions. No more than 30 visitors are permitted on the island at any given time and sometimes fewer than ten campers make the voyage. The National Park Service advises campers to carry an extra day's food and water in the event the pickup needs to be delayed due to bad weather.
Landing
There is no pier on San Miguel island so all public visitors arrive on the island by skiff at Cuyler Harbor . Landing on the island can be an exciting experience as the surf can swamp the landing boat. During ideal weather visitors are put ashore directly in front of the trail that leads into the interior of the island. When the swell is high, visitors might be placed on the beach to the east or west depending upon conditions.
Camping facilities
 San Miguel Island includes a campground with 10 sites. Each campsite includes a picnic table, wind break and an animal-proof box. The campground includes one pit toilet. Fires are prohibited due to the high winds and the inability to extinguish them. Sturdy tents are recommended as the wind can exceed , even during the summer. It is recommended that campers tie their tents to the wind break to keep them from blowing away when not being slept in.
Hiking
 With the exception of the trail leading to the campground and ranger station, hiking is restricted to ranger-led outings. Many visitors participate in the  round trip hike to Point Bennett to view the thousands of seals and sea lions that reside at the west end of the island during spring and summer. Another popular hike is to the Island's caliche forest. (Caliche is a kind of hardened calcium deposit.)
Water activities
Visitors to the island are restricted to ocean access at Cuyler Harbor. This landing is well protected from the strong ocean swell that is driven from the northwest. Cuyler has a sandy beach and visitors will often find themselves sharing the beach with elephant seals. The water is generally below 60 &lt;U+00B0&gt;F (16 &lt;U+00B0&gt;C), making it cold without a wetsuit. During low tides the harbor offers a tide pool area at the east end of the beach. Sea kayaking is not recommended for the novice as high winds can develop without notice.

References



ca:Illa San Miguel de:San Miguel Island et:San Migueli saar (California) fr:&lt;U+00CE&gt;le San Miguel
Category:Channel Islands of California Category:Geography of Santa Barbara County, California Category:Channel Islands National Park



Block 3010, Block Group 3, Census Tract 29.10, Santa Barbara County United States Census Bureau↩


