Doctor of Canon Law (; J.C.D.) is the doctoral-level terminal degree in the studies of canon law of the Roman Catholic Church.
It may also be abbreviated I.C.D. or dr.iur.can. (Iuris Canonici Doctor), ICDr., D.C.L., D.Cnl., D.D.C., or D.Can.L. (Doctor of Canon Law). Doctor of both laws (i.e. canon and civil) are J.U.D. (Juris Utriusque Doctor), or U.J.D. (Utriusque Juris Doctor).
A doctorate in canon law normally requires at least two years of additional study and the development and defense of an original dissertation that contributes to the development of canon law after having earned the degree Licentiate of Canon Law. Only pontifical universities and ecclesiastical faculties of canon law may grant the doctorate or licentiate in canon law.
The Licentiate of Canon Law is a three-year degree, the prerequisite for the study of which is normally the graduate level bachelor of sacred theology (S.T.B.), a master of divinity (M.Div.), a master of arts in Roman Catholic theology (M.A.), or a civil law degree (J.D. or LL.B.) and a bachelor degree in canon law (J.C.B.) or its relative equivalent.
While not a civil law degree, the doctor of canon law is in some ways comparable to the Doctor of Juridical Science (J.S.D.) or doctor of laws (LL.D.) in terms of the nature of study as they are terminal academic research degrees as opposed to professional degrees.
Members of the Supreme Tribunal of the Apostolic Signatura, Auditors of the Tribunal of the Roman Rota, judicial vicars, ecclesiastical judges, defenders of the bond, and promoters of justice, must possess either a doctorate or license in canon law. Either of the degrees is recommended for those who serve as vicar general or episcopal vicar in a diocese. Candidates for bishop must either possess the doctorate in canon law or the doctorate in sacred theology or be truly expert in one of those fields. Canonical advocates must possess the doctorate or be truly expert.
The Roman Church has the oldest continuously used homogenous legal system in the world. Following the Gregorian Reform's emphasis on canon law, bishops formed cathedral schools to train the clergy in canon law. Consequently, many of the medieval universities of Europe founded faculties of canon law (e.g., Cambridge and Oxford). Since the Protestant Reformation, however, they became limited to those universities which retained Catholic faculties (e.g., Pontifical University of St. Thomas Aquinas (Angelicum), Gregorian University, Catholic University of Louvain, Faculty of Canon Law &quot;S. Pio X&quot; in Venice). Other Catholic universities with ecclesiastical faculties in canon law were subsequently given the ability to grant the degree (e.g., The Catholic University of America, University of Saint Paul). The University of Santo Tomas in Manila, Philippines, has been awarding the degree since 1734.
Noted Doctors of Canon Law

Antonetti, Lorenzo, President emeritus of Administration of the Patrimony of the Apostolic See


Arregui Yarza, Antonio, Metropolitan Archbishop of the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Guayaquil (Ecuador): awarded a Doctorate in Canon Law by the Pontifical University of St. Thomas Aquinas (Angelicum)1


Juan Ignacio Arrieta, Archbishop, Secretary of Pontifical Council of Legislative Texts


Azpiroz Costa, Carlos Alfonso, O.P., former Master of the Order of Preachers: awarded a Doctorate in Canon Law by the Pontifical University of St. Thomas Aquinas (Angelicum)2


Benedict XV, Pope


Bertone, Tarcisio, Cardinal Secretary of State and Camerlengo of the Holy Roman Church


Bevilacqua, Anthony, Cardinal, Archbishop Emeritus of Philadelphia (USA)


Bovone, Alberto, Cardinal, Prefect of the Congregation for the Causes of Saints: awarded a Doctorate in Canon Law by the Pontifical University of St. Thomas Aquinas (Angelicum)


Brady, Se&lt;U+00E1&gt;n, Cardinal Archbishop of Armagh (Ireland)


Burke, Raymond Leo, Cardinal Prefect of the Apostolic Signatura, Archbishop Emeritus of the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Saint Louis, Missouri, and Bishop Emeritus of the Roman Catholic Diocese of La Crosse, Wisconsin (USA)


Nicolaus Copernicus (19 February 1473 &lt;U+2013&gt; 24 May 1543) was a Renaissance mathematician and astronomer who formulated a heliocentric model of the universe which placed the Sun, rather than the Earth, at the center. Received degree 31 May 1503 (Jure Canonico ... et doctoratus)


Cafardi, Nicholas P., Dean emeritus and Professor of Law of the Duquesne University School of Law (USA): awarded a Doctorate in Canon Law by the Pontifical University of St. Thomas Aquinas (Angelicum)3


Caffarra, Carlo, Cardinal, Archbishop of Bologna (Italy)


Castrill&lt;U+00F3&gt;n Hoyos, Dar&lt;U+00ED&gt;o, Cardinal, President Emeritus of the Pontifical Commission Ecclesia Dei


Nicolas Copernicus (Bologna)


Monsignor Joseph Devlin, Assistant Professor of Religion, La Salle University


Dunn, Kevin John, Bishop of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Hexham and Newcastle (England): awarded a Doctorate in Canon Law by the Pontifical University of St. Thomas Aquinas (Angelicum)4


Egan, Edward, Cardinal, Archbishop Emeritus of New York (USA)


Felici, Angelo, President Emeritus of the Pontifical Commission Ecclesia Dei


Ferme Brian Edwin, Dean of Canon Law Faculty in Venice: Awarded a Doctorate in Canon Law in Rome, and a Doctorate in Medieval History in Oxford.


G&lt;U+00E4&gt;nswein, Georg, monsignor, private secretary to Pope Benedict XVI


Heim, Bruno Bernard, late Titular Archbishop of Xanthus, Apostolic Nuncio emeritus to Great Britain, prominent armorists of twentieth century ecclesiastical heraldry


Herranz, Juli&lt;U+00E1&gt;n, Cardinal, President emeritus of the Pontifical Council for the Interpretation of Legislative Texts: awarded a Doctorate in Canon Law by the Pontifical University of St. Thomas Aquinas (Angelicum)5


Keeler, William, Archbishop Emeritus of Baltimore (USA)


Kelly, Thomas Cajetan O.P., Archbishop Emeritus of the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Louisville, Kentucky (USA): awarded a Doctorate in Canon Law by the Pontifical University of St. Thomas Aquinas (Angelicum)6


Lazzarotto, Giuseppe, Apostolic Nuncio to Australia


Listecki, Jerome Edward, Archbishop of the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Milwaukee, Wisconsin, formerly Bishop of the Roman Catholic Diocese of La Crosse, Wisconsin and Auxiliary Bishop of the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Chicago, Illinois (USA): awarded a Doctorate in Canon Law by the Pontifical University of St. Thomas Aquinas (Angelicum)7


Lyndwood, William


McCarthy, Edward A., Archbishop Emeritus of the Archdiocese of Miami, Florida, and namesake of Archbishop Edward A. McCarthy High School in Ft. Lauderdale, Florida.


Migliore, Celestino Archbishop, Apostolic Nuncio to Poland and formerly the Apostolic Nuncio and Permanent Observer, Permanent Observer Mission of the Holy See to the United Nations


Moverley, Gerald, Bishop Emeritus of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Hallam (England): awarded a Doctorate in Canon Law by the Pontifical University of St. Thomas Aquinas (Angelicum)8


David M. O'Connell, C.M., Bishop of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Trenton, New Jersey, and President Emeritus of the Catholic University of America: awarded a Doctorate in Canon Law from the Catholic University of America9


Oddi, Silvio, Cardinal, Prefect emeritus of the Congregation for the Clergy: awarded a Doctorate in Canon Law by the Pontifical University of St. Thomas Aquinas (Angelicum)10


Paprocki, Thomas, Bishop of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Springfield in Illinois


Paul VI, Pope: awarded Doctorate in Canon Law from the University of Milan


Smith, Peter, Metropolitan Archbishop of the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Cardiff (Wales): awarded a Doctorate in Canon Law by the Pontifical University of St. Thomas Aquinas (Angelicum)11


Peters, Edward N., Catholic University of America, 1991


Polti Santill&lt;U+00E1&gt;n, Francisco, Bishop of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Santiago del Estero (Argentina)


Re, Giovanni Battista, Cardinal, Prefect of the Congregation for Bishops


Rossi, Bernard P.H., Priest of Saint Michael's Parish in Burnaby, British Columbia (Archdiocese of Vancouver)12


Sodano, Angelo, Cardinal Secretary emeritus of State


Symeon Metropolitan, Russian Orthodox Church in America


Tauran, Jean-Louis, Cardinal, President of Pontifical Council for Interreligious Dialogue


Torfs, Rik, Professor of Canon Law at Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, Senator in the Belgian Senate, Rector of the University in Leuven.


Vithayathil, Mar Varkey C.Ss.R., Cardinal, Major Archbishop of the Syro-Malabar Catholic Archdiocese of Ernakulam-Angamaly (India): awarded a Doctorate in Canon Law by the Pontifical University of St. Thomas Aquinas (Angelicum)13

Footnotes

See also

Doctor of Canon and Civil Law


Canon Law, Doctor Category:Law degrees Category:Canon law (Catholic Church) Category:Religious degrees



Cf. [http://212.77.1.245/news_services/bulletin/news/13285.php?index=13285&amp;po_date=07.05.2003&amp;lang=ge#RINUNCIA%20DELL&lt;U+2019&gt;ARCIVESCOVO%20METROPOLITA%20DI%20GUAYAQUIL%20(ECUADOR)%20E%20NOMINA%20DEL%20SUCCESSORE Holy See Press Office, Daily Bulletin of 07.05.2003, Rinunce e nomine, Rinuncia dell&lt;U+2019&gt;Arcivescovo Metropolita di Guayaquil (Ecuador) e nomina del successore] ↩
Cf. The Order of Preachers, Biography of Carlos Alfonso Azpiroz Costa O.P.↩
Cf. Duquesne University School of Law, Faculty, Academics (Full-Time Faculty and Administration), Nicholas P. Cafardi↩
Cf. Holy See Press Office, Daily Bulletin of 26.03.2004, Rinunce e nomine, Rinuncia del Vescovo di Hexham and Newcastle (Inghilterra) e nomina del successore ↩
Cf. Sala Stampa della Santa Sede, Il Collegio Cardinalizio, Cenni biografici, Herranz Card. Juli&lt;U+00E1&gt;n ↩
Cf. Archdiocese of Louisville, The Archdiocese, Archbishop Thomas Cajetan Kelly, O.P.↩
Cf. [http://212.77.1.245/news_services/bulletin/news/15877.php?index=15877&amp;po_date=29.12.2004&amp;lang=sp#NOMINA%20DEL%20VESCOVO%20DI%20LA%20CROSSE%20(U.S.A.) Holy See Press Office, Daily Bulletin of 29.12.2004, Rinunce e nomine, Nomina del Vescovo di La Crosse (U.S.A.)] ↩
Cf. The Church in England and Wales, News Release (14 December 1996), Death of Bishop Moverley↩
Cf. Catholic University, Office of the President, Biography↩
Cf. Holy See Press Office, College of Cardinals, Biographical notes, Oddi Card. Silvio↩
Cf. [http://212.77.1.245/news_services/bulletin/news/9870.php?index=9870&amp;po_date=26.10.2001&amp;lang=sp#RINUNCIA%20DELL&lt;U+2019&gt;ARCIVESCOVO%20METROPOLITA%20DI%20CARDIFF%20(GALLES)%20E%20NOMINA%20DEL%20SUCCESSORE Holy See Press Office, Daily Bulletin of 26.10.2001, Rinunce e nomine, Rinuncia dell&lt;U+2018&gt;Arcivescovo Metropolita di Cardiff (Galles) e nomina del successore] ↩
Cf. 1↩
Cf. Holy See Press Office, College of Cardinals, Biographical notes, Vithayathil Card. Varkey, C.SS.R.↩


