thumb|420px|3-D perspective view of the southeastern Hawaiian Islands, with the white summits of Mauna Loa ( high) and Mauna Kea ( high) The 15 volcanoes that make up the 8 principal islands of Hawaii are the youngest in a chain of over 125 volcanoes that stretch  across the North Pacific Ocean, called the Hawaiian-Emperor seamount chain.1
Background
 The chain is remarkable for its length and the number of volcanoes that comprise it. It is split into two subsections across a break, separating the older Emperor Seamount Chain from the younger Hawaiian Ridge; the &quot;V&quot; shape is easily noticeable in satellite photos.2 The volcanoes are systematically younger as you move further southeast; the oldest dated volcano, located at the northern end, is 81 million years. The break between the two sub-chains is 43 million years- in comparison, the oldest of the principal islands, Kauai, is little more than 5 million years.3
The &quot;assembly line&quot; that forms the volcanoes is driven by a hot spot- a plume of lava deep within the Earth procuring magma at the surface. As the Pacific Plate moves in a west-northwest direction, each volcano moves with it away from its place of origin above the hot spot. The age and orientation of the volcanoes are a record of the direction, rate of movement, and orientation of the Pacific Plate. The pronounced 43 million year old break separating the Hawaiian Ridge from the Emperor Chain marks a dramatic change in direction of plate movement.4  All of the volcanoes in the chain evolved through a sequence of stages. A typical pattern of activity is a steady rise early in the volcano's history, perhaps 500,000 years long, and then a sharp decline of activity as the volcano ages and moves away from its hotspot.5 However, it may take several million years for volcanism to stop entirely. Interestingly, as the eruption rate changes, so does the composition of its lava. A relationship between height above sea level and type of lava exists. Underwater volcanoes generally form charecteristic Pillow lava, so named for their shape, while near-water eruptions tend to be composed mainly of ash. Once the volcano is high enough so as to eliminate interference from water, its lava flows become those of ropey Pahoehoe flows and the blocky 'A'a lava.6
Submarine preshield stage
  When a volcano is first born near the Hawaiian hotspot, it begins its growth in the submarine preshield stage, characterized by infrequent, typically low volume eruptions. The volcano is steep-sided, and it usually has a defined caldera and has two or more rift zones radiating from the summit. The type of lava erupted in this stage of activity is Alkalic basalt.7
Because the eruptions occur with the volcano underwater, the form of lava typical to eruptions is pillow lava. Pillow lava is puffy, rounded lava that was given very little time to cool due to immediate exposure to water. Water pressure prevents the lava from exploding upon contact with the cold ocean water, forcing it to simmer and solidify quickly. This stage is thought to last about 200,000 years, but lavas erupted during this stage make up only a tiny fraction of the final volume of the volcano.8 As time progresses, eruptions become stronger and more frequent.
The only example of a Hawaiian volcano in this stage is Lo&lt;U+2018&gt;ihi Seamount, which is thought to be transitioning from the submarine preshield stage into the submarine phase of the shield stage. All older volcanoes have had their preshield stage lavas buried by younger lavas, so everything that is known about this stage comes from research done on Lo&lt;U+2018&gt;ihi Seamount.9
Shield stages
The shield stage of the volcano is subdivided into three phases: the submarine, explosive, and sub aerial. During this stage of growth, the volcano accumulates about 95 percent of its mass and it takes on the &quot;shield&quot; shape that shield volcanoes are named for. It is also the stage where the volcano's eruptive frequency reaches its peak.10
Submarine phase
  As eruptions become more and more frequent at the end of the preshield stage, the composition of the lava erupted from the Hawaiian volcano changes from alkalic basalt to tholeiitic basalt and the volcano enters the submarine phase of the shield stage. In this phase, the volcano continues to erupt pillow lava. Calderas form, fill, and reform at the volcano's summit and the rift zones remain prominent. The volcano builds its way up to sea level. The submarine phase ends when the volcano is only shallowly submerged.11
The only example of a volcano in this stage is Loihi Seamount, which is currently transitioning into this phase from the preshield stage.
Explosive phase
 This volcanic phase, so named for the explosive reactions with lava that take place, begins when the volcano just breaches the surface. The pressure and instantaneous cooling of being underwater evaporates, replaced instead by contact with water. Lava and seawater make contact, resulting in a lot of steam.12 The change in environment also procures a change in lava type, and the lava from this stage is mostly ash. These explosive eruptions continue intermittently for several hundred thousand years.13 Calderas continually develop and fill, and rift zones remain prominent. The phase ends when the volcano has sufficient mass and height (about 4,000 feet above sea level) that the interaction between sea water and erupting lava fade away.14
Subaerial phase
 Once a volcano has put on enough mass and height to end frequent contact with water, the sub aerial substage begins. During this stage of activity, the explosive eruptions become much less frequent and the nature of the eruptions become much more gentle. Lava flows are a combination of p&lt;U+0101&gt;hoehoe and &lt;U+2018&gt;a&lt;U+2018&gt;a.15 It is during this stage, arguably the best-studied, that the low-profile &quot;shield&quot; shape of Hawaiian volcanoes is formed, named for the shape of a warrior's shield.16 Eruption rates and frequencies peak, and about 95% of the volcano's eventual volume forms during a period of roughly 500,000 years.17
The lava erupted in this stage form flows of p&lt;U+0101&gt;hoehoe or &lt;U+2018&gt;a&lt;U+2018&gt;a. During this subaerial stage, the flanks of the growing volcanoes are unstable and as a result, large landslides may occur. At least 17 major landslides have occurred around the major Hawaiian islands. This stage is arguably the most well-studied, as all eruptions that occurred in the 20th century in Hawai&lt;U+2018&gt;i were produced by volcanoes in this phase.18
Mauna Loa and K&lt;U+012B&gt;lauea volcanoes are in this phase of activity.
Postshield stage

The dark outline of Hualalai, showing the won and weathered shape of a volcano in the Post-shield stage.|thumb

As the volcano reaches the end of the shield stage, the volcano goes through another series of changes as it enters the postshield stage. The type of lava erupted changes from tholeiitic basalt back to alkalic basalt and eruptions become slightly more explosive.19 Eruptions in the postshield stage cap the volcano with a carapace of lava, containing low silica and high alkali contents, the reverse of the stage before it. Some Hawaiian volcanoes diverge from this, however. Lava flows are those of a lot of cinder with stocky, pasty 'A'a flows.20 Caldera development stops, and the rift zones become more and more inactive. The new lava flow raises the slope grade, as the 'a'a never reaches the base. These lavas commonly fill and overflow the caldera.21 Eruption rate gradually decreases over a period of around 250,000 years, eventually stopping altogether as the volcano goes dormant.22
Mauna Kea, Hual&lt;U+0101&gt;lai, and Haleakal&lt;U+0101&gt; volcanoes are in this stage of activity.
Erosional stage
After the volcano becomes dormant, the forces of erosion gain control of the mountain. The volcano subsides into the oceanic crust due to its immense weight and loses elevation. Meanwhile, rain also bites at the volcano, creating spectacular valleys. Coral reefs grow along the shoreline. The volcano, altogether, becomes a skeleton of its former self.23
Kohala, L&lt;U+0101&gt;nai, and Wai&lt;U+2018&gt;anae volcanoes are examples of volcanoes in this stage of development.
Rejuvenated stage
After a long period of dormancy and erosion of the surface, the volcano might become active again, entering a final stage of activity called the rejuvenated stage. During this stage, the volcano erupts small volumes of lava very infrequently. These eruptions are often spread out over several millions of years.24 The composition of the lavas erupted in this stage are usually alkalic.
Ko&lt;U+2018&gt;olau and West Maui volcanoes are examples of volcanoes in this stage of development. Note, however, that because in this stage eruptions are very infrequent (occurring thousands or even tens of thousands of years apart), erosion is still the primary factor controlling the volcano at this point.
Coral atoll stage
 Eventually, erosion and subsidence break the volcano down to sea level. At this point, the volcano becomes an atoll, with a ring of coral and sand islands surrounding a lagoon. All the Hawaiian islands west of the Gardner Pinnacles in the Northwestern Hawaiian Islands are in this stage.
Guyot stage
 Atolls are the product of the growth of tropical marine organisms, so these islands are only found in warm tropical waters. Eventually, the Pacific Plate carries the volcanic atoll into waters too cold for these marine organisms to maintain a reef by growth.25 Volcanic islands located beyond the warm water temperature requirements of reef building organisms become seamounts as they subside and are eroded away at the surface. An island that is located where the ocean water temperatures are just sufficiently warm for upward reef growth to keep pace with the rate of subsidence is said to be at the Darwin Point.26 Islands more polar evolve towards seamounts or guyots; islands more equatorial evolve towards atolls (see Kure Atoll).
After the reef dies, the volcano subsides or erodes below sea level and becomes a coral-capped seamount. These flat-topped seamounts are called guyots. Most, if not all, the volcanoes west of Kure Atoll as well as most, if not all, the volcanoes in the Emperor Seamount chain are guyots.27
Other patterns
Not all Hawaiian volcanoes go through all the stages of activity described here. For example, Ko&lt;U+2018&gt;olau Volcano on O&lt;U+2018&gt;ahu—which prehistorically was mostly destroyed by a cataclysmic landslide—never went through the postshield stage and became dormant for hundreds of thousands of years after the shield stage before coming back to life for the rejuvenated stage of activity; some volcanoes apparently never rose above sea level; and there is no evidence to suggest that West Moloka&lt;U+2018&gt;i volcano ever went through a rejuvenated stage, while its younger neighbors, East Moloka&lt;U+2018&gt;i and West Maui volcanoes, have evident rejuvenated lavas.28
References

External links

Volcano Watch - Evolution of Hawaiian Volcanoes

Category:Volcanoes of Hawaii Category:Guyots



↩





↩























