

Free Syrian Army |opponents =  Syrian Armed Forces |battles = Syrian civil war }} The Syrian Liberation Front (, Jabha Tahrir Suriya, SLF) or Front to Liberate Syria is a coalition of Islamist rebel brigades who are actively fighting against the Bashar al-Assad government in the Syrian civil war. As of late 2012, it is one of the most powerful powerful armed groupings in Syria,1 representing up to half of Bashar Assad's armed opponents.2
Background
Founded in September 2012 after secret negotiations between the group's leaders, the Front is headed by Ahmed Abu Issa, the leader of the Suqour al-Sham Brigade. The Front includes around 20 Islamist groups and has tens of thousands of fighters active through much of Syria, overshadowing the Free Syrian Army in some regions. While some member groups appear to consider themselves members of both the Front and the FSA,3 Abu Issa says the Front aims to maintain brotherly relations with the FSA while declining to offer full support and criticising those leaders of the FSA that remain in Turkey. 4
The Front includes some of the most important rebel units active in the civil war, including Suqour al-Sham (Idlib and the Farouq Brigades (Homs). Other prominent groups in the Front include the Deir Ezzor Revolutionary Council (Deir ez-Zor), Tajamo Ansar al-Islam (Damascus), Amr Ibn al-Aas Brigade (Aleppo), and al-Naser Salaheddin Brigade (Latakia).5 These groups are geographically scattered, vary in size and influence, and are dependent on different sources of funding. It is unclear how effectively the Front coordinates between the varying groups or how durable the alliance will be. 6
Weapons
Abu Issa says that the Front obtains their weapons from attacks on the Syrian Armed Forces and from arms dealers inside and outside Syria, however it reportedly receives support from Turkey and Qatar7. It has been accused by members of the FSA of monopolizing the supply of weapons through Turkey in order to marginalize unaffiliated rebel groups89.
Ideology
The Group was originally called the Islamic Front to Liberate Syria, Brigade leaders voted to drop the word Islamic but the Front has an Islamist ideology10. It includes both Muslim Brotherhood and Salafist inspired groups, however many of the more hardline Islamist groups active in the Syrian Civil War are members of the Syrian Islamic Front. The Front excludes the Jihadist Al-Nusra Front, and Ahrar al-Sham withdrew from the Front in protest at the killing of a Jihadist leader by one of the member groups11. Some in the Free Syrian Army criticise the Front for it's emphasis on an Islamic identity in a religiously mixed country.12
The Front has a minimalist political platform, promising to protect minorities and stating that Sharia law is the point of reference for the Front.13
See also

Syrian civil war

References

External links

Syrian Liberation Front website 




Category:2012 establishments in Syria Category:Politics of Syria Category:Organizations of the Syrian civil war Category:Guerrilla organizations Category:Rebellions in Syria



↩





↩








