
Markman v. Westview Instruments, Inc., 517 U.S. 370 (1996), is a United States Supreme Court case on whether the interpretation of patent claims is a matter of law or a question of fact. An issue designated as a matter of law is resolved by the judge, and an issue construed as a question of fact is determined by the jury.
In general, the effectiveness of a particular patent depends on its potential at blocking competitors. The key for a patent holder is getting the proper definition of words used in the patent to allow blocking of the particular troublesome competitive product. Prior to this decision, juries had the responsibility of deciding what the words used in patent claims meant. Opposing results in cases with similar facts were common, and a perception arose that the outcome of such trials was somewhat arbitrary. In Markman, the Court held that judges, not juries, would evaluate and decide the meaning of the words used in patent claims. Judges were to look at four sources for definitions in order of priority:

The written description accompanying the patent claims is most relevant;
The documentation of the history of the patent as it went through the application;
Standard dictionaries of English;
Finally, if all else fails, expert testimony from experts &quot;skilled in the art&quot; at issue.

This case has had a significant impact on the patent litigation process in the United States. Many jurisdictions now hold Markman hearings to construe patent claims prior to the start of the actual trial. Patent infringement suits now often settle after this stage of the litigation process.
Supreme Court decision
In a unanimous ruling, the court affirmed the judgment of the circuit court, holding that:


The construction of a patent, including terms of art within its claim, is exclusively within the province of the court.


Ruling
Justice David Souter wrote the unanimous decision of the court.
External links

Findlaw Copy of the Case

Category:United States Supreme Court cases Category:United States patent case law Category:1996 in law
