
Lightning Bar (1951&lt;U+2013&gt;1960) was an American Quarter Horse race horse and breeding stallion. Bred and owned his entire life by Art Pollard, Lightning Bar's sire, or father, was a Thoroughbred. His dam, or mother, was originally from Louisiana, noted for breeding race horses that ran short distances. Although his racing career was cut short by illness after only one year, he managed to achieve high speeds on the track. After racing, he became a show horse and was trained as a team roping horse. As a breeding stallion, he sired only eight crops, or years, of foals, but they included a number of influential horses, among them his most famous son, Doc Bar. Lightning Bar died in 1960 at the age of nine, the result of a viral infection. He was inducted into the American Quarter Horse Association (AQHA) American Quarter Horse Hall of Fame in 2008.
Early life
Foaled, or born, in 1951, Lightning Bar was bred to be a race horse, but injuries and bouts of illnesses kept him from racing past the age of two.1 His breeder, Art Pollard, owned him for the horse's entire life.2 Lightning Bar was sired by Three Bars, a Thoroughbred stallion later inducted into the AQHA Hall of Fame. His dam was Della P, a daughter of the Thoroughbred stallion Doc Horn. His second dam, or maternal grandmother, was a mare who was never given a name and was sired by Old D. J.3 Art Pollard purchased Della P from &quot;Dink&quot; Parker for $1,750 ($ as of ) in the late 1940s.4 Della P was bred in Louisiana, a leader in breeding short distance racehorses between 1900&lt;U+2013&gt;40,5 and was taken to Arizona by Parker.6
When Lightning Bar was about five days old, Pollard was afraid that he had leg problems and was buck-kneed, and considered putting the young colt to sleep. First, though, he sought the advice of Parker, and as Pollard later related the story, &quot;Dink just looked at me and shook his head. 'Ain't you ever gonna learn nothing? That colt's just what you're looking for.' &quot;7 When mature, the sorrel-colored8 Lightning Bar stood  tall and weighed about .9
Racing and show career
Lightning Bar started on the racetrack ten times, winning four races, coming in second three times, and third once. Among those finishes, he ran second and third in two stakes races,10 a type of race for higher quality horses with a higher payout.11 His total earnings on the track were $1,491 ($ as of ),12 and his highest speed index, or comparative rating of his speed, was AAA,13 the highest achievable at the time.14 Lightning Bar raced for only one year, as he suffered from bouts of pneumonia, strangles, and leg injuries. He equalled one track record for two-year-olds at the Los Angeles County Fair race meeting in Pomona, California, running  in 17.2 seconds.15
After his racing career ended, Lightning Bar went on to become a show horse, earning 18 open halter points with the AQHA, and an AQHA Champion award in 1955.16 He won one grand championship and one reserve championship in halter classes at recognized AQHA shows.17
Breeding career
The first year Lightning Bar stood as a breeding stallion his stud fee, the fee charged to breed a mare to him, was $250 ($ as of ) but only nine mares were bred to him.18 The next year, he bred 11 mares, but in 1956, he bred 102 mares at $500 ($ as of ) each.19 One of Pollard's attempts to advertise his stallion involved letting one of his ranch hands take the stallion to a local jackpot roping. Pollard assumed that the hand would just ride Lightning Bar around and show him off, but he later discovered that more was involved. Pollard said later that &quot;I should have been suspicious when he (the ranch hand) returned with Lightning Bar that afternoon, with a sheepish grin on his face. I asked him how the horse was received and he said 'The stud did good and I won the jackpot!' After congratulating him, I asked which rope horse he had used. He replied, 'The stud.' &quot;20{{#tag:ref|Roping requires a horse that can accelerate quickly, going from standing to  in a few seconds.21|group=notes}}
Pollard said of Lightning Bar that &quot;I always had to be careful about the kind of latch I used on a gate with that horse. He could figure them out faster than I could. He would open a gate, and go for a stroll.&quot;22 Lightning Bar sired 148 foals in his eight breeding seasons, and 118 of those foals went on to either race or show careers. Of his foals, 108 started races, and 77 won, earning a total of $476,949.{{#tag:ref|No inflation adjusted earnings figures are given for the earnings of his foals as the foals raced over a number of years, making the inflation adjustment unreliable.|group=notes}} The most successful of his foals, Lightning Belle, earned $60,134 ($ as of ).23
Five of Lightning Bar's foals earned AQHA Championships: Cactus Comet, Crash Bang, Lightning Rey, Pana Bar and Relampago Bar; Lightning Rey earned a Supreme Championship. In addition, Lightening Bar's offspring earned $1,163.32 in National Cutting Horse Association sanctioned cattle cutting competitions,24{{#tag:ref|No inflation adjusted earnings figures are given for the earnings of his foals as the foals showed over a number of years, making the inflation adjustment unreliable.|group=notes}} and four earned a Superior Halter Horse title from the AQHA.25
Death and legacy
Lightning Bar died in June 1960 from Colitis-X,26 a virus of unknown origin that can kill rapidly and without warning.27 The virus infected many of Pollard's horses, and of those that contracted the disease only three survived. Pollard was so heartbroken, he sold off his remaining stock and did not return to the Quarter Horse business for 15 years. Pollard later said about the loss of his horses that &quot;it was a nightmare when they were wiped out. Even now, we can still feel the sadness of losing those horses.&quot;28 Another time, Pollard remarked that &quot;Someone once said that a man deserves one good woman and one good dog in his lifetime. To that quip I would add one good horse. I certainly had one in Lightning Bar.&quot;29
Lightning Bar was inducted into the AQHA's American Quarter Horse Hall of Fame in 2008.30 His most famous son was Doc Bar, who was also inducted into the Hall of Fame.31 Lightning Bar's daughter Glamour Bars was the dam of Impressive, who became famous as one of the leading sires of halter horses.32 Two stakes races were run in Lightning Bar's memory, the first at Los Alamitos Race track in California for one year in 1961. The second ran from 1962 to 1966 at Ruidoso Downs in New Mexico.33
Pedigree

Notes

Citations

References


American Quarter Horse Association (AQHA) (2009). AQHA Official Get of Sire Record for Lightning Bar. American Quarter Horse Association Records Department. Accessed on May 24, 2009.













Further reading

&lt;U+2013&gt; for an extended and highly technical discussion of his breeding and his foals

External links

All Breed Pedigree Database pedigree for Lightning Bar
AQHA Hall of Fame page for Lightning Bar



Category: Quarterhorse racehorses Category: Influential Quarter horse sires




American Quarter Horse Association (AQHA) Official Get of Sire Record for Lightning Bar.↩


Denhardt Quarter Horses p. 55.↩
Simmons &quot;Lightning Bar&quot; Legends 2 p. 143.↩
Simmons &quot;Lightning Bar&quot; Legends 2 p. 145.↩



Price and Shiers Lyons Press Horseman's Dictionary p. 200.↩


Wagoner Quarter Racing Digest p. A-8.↩
Simmons &quot;Lightning Bar&quot; Legends 2 p. 146.↩




Simmons &quot;Lightning Bar&quot; Legends 2 p. 147.↩
Strickland Competing in Western Shows &amp; Events p. 98.↩



Pitzer Most Influential Quarter Horse Sires p. 72.↩

Belknap Horsewords p. 113.↩
Simmons &quot;Lightning Bar&quot; Legends 2 p. 149.↩
Nye Complete Book of the Quarter Horse p. 283.↩
Staff &quot;Hall of Fame: Inductees Represent the Best of AQHA&quot; Quarter Horse Journal p. 48.↩

Simmons &quot;Lightning Bar&quot; Legends 2 p. 148.↩
Smelker Quarter Racing Stakes Horses I History of Events section, p. 53.↩


