
Hatton is a village in South Derbyshire, England. It is located 6 km north of Burton upon Trent, 20 km west of Derby and 40 km east of Stoke-on-Trent.
Geography
Hatton is about 1 km north of Tutbury, Staffordshire with the River Dove running between the two villages and creating the County boundary; the river is crossed by a listed bridge. It has a population of 2,690 and is mainly residential.
The village has excellent transport links. It is close to the A50 road which links the M1 and M6. The A50 used to pass across the northern edge of the village, but was bypassed in May 1995 by the 6 mile &lt;U+00A3&gt;19million Hatton, Hilton and Foston Bypass. The former route is now the A511, which passes through the village from Tutbury. Tutbury and Hatton railway station is on the Nottingham to Crewe line. Services are provided by East Midlands Trains. The station was originally closed in the Beeching cuts in the 1960s, but was re-opened in the 1980s (like other previously-closed rural stations) due to public demand. Local bus services are provided by Arriva who link Hatton with the market towns of Burton-upon-Trent and Uttoxeter, and Trent Barton who link with Derby and Burton-upon-Trent.
The village is within the district of South Derbyshire District Council and County of Derbyshire County Council. The local MP is Heather Wheeler.
Environment
The land adjacent to the River Dove is home to 'Thistley Meadow'. This community nature reserve has gone from strength to strength over recent years through the dedication and hard work of local residents. From this southern part of the village there are excellent views across the river to Tutbury Castle and the long horizon beyond adds to the open panoramic views from the bridge. Towards the northern part of the village there is a good network of footpaths and bridle ways which can be used to navigate round the village or used as a link to the neighbouring villages of Hilton and Marston-on-Dove; or even further beyond into the less populated villages of South Derbyshire which link Hatton with the open farmland that reaches up towards Ashbourne and the Peak District National Park. Heathland and pasture are the dominant environmental features and this balances well with the residential and commercial aspects of the village.
Economy
Local employers include Nestl&lt;U+00E9&gt; who have a historical presence in the village due to the surrounding farmland, which supported a strong dairy farming industry, and proximity to rail transport. Nestl&lt;U+00E9&gt;'s factory is labelled by the company as their Tutbury factory. Until the late 1970s the factory had its own private siding, which gave access to milk trains. The factory since has developed into a major coffee producer, the sole UK facility producing the Dolce Gusto range, and also Nescaf&lt;U+00E9&gt;, which is also made in Hayes.1
The village has a famous caf&lt;U+00E9&gt;, The Salt Box on the A511, which has won awards as the best transport caf&lt;U+00E9&gt; in the UK. There is no similar truck stop on the parallel A50, hence its popularity. Opposite the cafe is the Sunar Gow, Indian restaurant and nearby is the Railway Tavern pub. There is a newly built Co-op in the village, next to the train station, as well as a Post Office, two newsagents and several other village shops and food outlets.
History
Hatton was mentioned in the Domesday book as belonging to Henry de Ferrers2 and being worth twenty shillings.3 The parish church is All Saints.
The village is home to John Berry1, who designed the Esso tiger in the 1950s, and many children's reference books for Ladybird Books.
The village also is home to ex Derby County footballer Roger Davies (footballer) who has lived in Hatton for some years.
References

External links


Local councillor
Heath Fields Primary School

nl:Hatton (Derbyshire) pl:Hatton (Derbyshire)
Category:Villages in Derbyshire



http://www.nestle.co.uk/Careers/WorkingWithUs/WhatsMadeWhere↩
Henry was given a large number of manors in Derbyshire including Brailsford, Aston-on-Trent, Pilsbury and Bradley.↩
Domesday Book: A Complete Translation. London: Penguin, 2003. ISBN 0-14-143994-7 p.745↩


