

Noah Galloway is a United States Army soldier, model and athlete. He got injured in battle in Iraq, and lost his left arm and left leg. He is currently a contestant on Dancing with the Stars season 20, paired with Sharna Burgess.1
Military career
A native of Birmingham, Alabama, Sergeant Noah Galloway was assigned to the 1st of the 502nd Infantry of the 101st Airborne Division out of Fort Campbell, Kentucky during Operation Iraqi Freedom.
Just three months in to his second tour of duty, he experienced a life changing injury. On December 19, 2005, Galloway lost two limbs: his left arm above the elbow and left leg above the knee in an improvised explosive device attack.2 He was transported to Germany to receive medical treatment, remaining unconscious for five days. Galloway woke up late in the evening on Christmas Eve to learn he lost two of his limbs and sustained severe injuries to his right leg and his jaw. Galloway was then transferred to Walter Reed Army Medical Center in Washington, DC.
Motivational speaking
Now a personal trainer and motivational speaker, Galloway continues to compete, participating in adventure races around the country, such as Tough Mudder, Spartan events, crossfit competitions plus numerous 5K and 10K races.
A sought after public speaker, Galloway travels the country sharing his story, encouraging and motivating others to offer no excuses. From elementary school assemblies to veterans organizations to corporate sales meetings, Galloway&lt;U+2019&gt;s enthusiasm for life and his passion for helping others brings a unique perspective to gatherings.
Modelling
Most recently, Galloway appeared on the November cover of Men&lt;U+2019&gt;s Health magazine as he was named the publication&lt;U+2019&gt;s 2014 Ultimate Guy. He&lt;U+2019&gt;s also been a guest on numerous national talk shows including The Ellen Degeneres Show and The Today Show. On October 2014, Galloway became the spokesman and model for Kenneth Cole's new fragrance Mankind Ultimate.
Dancing with the Stars
He was chosen as a contestant on Dancing with the Stars season 20, paired with Sharna Burgess.



Week #
Dance/Song
Judges' score
Result




Inaba
Goodman
Hough
Tonioli


1
Cha-Cha-Cha/ &quot;I Lived&quot;
7
6


2
Samba/ &quot;Homegrown Honey&quot;
7
6


3
Argentine Tango





Charity work
Galloway recently created the No Excuses Charitable Fund, which raises money and awareness for organizations that mean the most to him, including Operation Enduring Warrior and the YMCA of Alabaster, AL.
Filmography

List of Television Appearances and Roles


Year
Title
Role
Notes




2013
True Life
Noah
Episode: &quot;I'm Doing A Tough Mudder&quot;


2014
The Ellen DeGeneres Show
Himself
Aired on: October 24, 2014


2015
Entertainment Tonight
Himself
Aired on: February 24, 2015, March 17, 2015


2015
Dancing with the Stars
Himself/Contestant




References

External links

Bio on Noah Galloway's website
Article about True Life on MTV Shows Blog
http://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/mankind-fragrance-by-kenneth-cole-announces-noah-galloway-revealed-as-the-ultimate-mens-health-guy-278381171.html


Category:1981 births Category:American amputees Category:American athletes Category:American military personnel of the Iraq War Category:American models Category:American motivational speakers Category:American philanthropists Category:American television personalities Category:Living people Category:Participants in American reality television series Category:People from Birmingham, Alabama Category:United States Army soldiers



↩
↩


