
Austin Zoo &amp; Animal Sanctuary is a non-profit rescue zoo and animal sanctuary located at 10808 Rawhide Trail in southwestern unincorporated Travis County, Texas, United States, west of Austin.
The mission of Austin Zoo and Animal Sanctuary is to assist animals in need through rescue, rehabilitation and education. Last year, over 175,000 people visited Austin Zoo &amp; Animal Sanctuary.
History
Austin Zoo started out as a goat ranch. In 1990, it became the Good Day Ranch, housing animals in need. At that time, the animals were mostly domesticated and local animals including goats, pigs, fallow deer, donkeys, and ponies, with just a few exotic animals. Gradually the number of exotic animals increased, and in 1994 the name was changed to Austin Zoo. In 2000, the zoo became a 501(c)3 nonprofit organization.1 Today, the zoo and sanctuary is home to mostly exotic animals that were rescued from or unwanted by their owners, animals from other zoos and sanctuaries, and animals who were awarded protection through the judicial system. All of these animals have a forever home with Austin Zoo &amp; Animal Sanctuary.
Animals
Austin Zoo currently has over 300 animals from over 100 different species,2 including African lions, Bengal tigers, cougars, jaguars, three species of monkeys, black bears, ring-tailed lemurs, and porcupines.3 In 2009 the zoo became home to four wolf hybrids which had been abandoned during Hurricane Ike in 2008.4
Conservation breeding
In 2010 the zoo received a pair of lions which were believed to be Barbary lions from a private owner. Because these lions are believed extinct in the wild, the zoo agreed to breed them and to provide DNA samples to the Barbary Lion Project. The family of lions now includes two cubs.56
Notes

External links








Category:Organizations established in 1990 Category:Culture of Austin, Texas Category:Buildings and structures in Travis County, Texas Category:Animal charities Category:Zoos in Texas Category:Animal welfare organizations in the United States Category:Visitor attractions in Travis County, Texas











