
The Airborne Toxic Event is an American rock band from Los Feliz, Los Angeles, California comprising Mikel Jollett (vocals, guitar, keyboards), Steven Chen (guitar, keyboards), Noah Harmon (bass), Daren Taylor (drums) and Anna Bulbrook (viola, keyboards, tambourine, backing vocals). Named after a section of the book White Noise, by Don DeLillo, the group incorporates string instruments and keyboards, along with a standard rock lineup of guitar, drums, and bass guitar.
Initially releasing their debut via Majordomo (an imprint of Shout! Factory) in 2008, the band switched to a major in 2009, Island Records.
History
Formation and early history
The band was formed in 2006 by Mikel Jollett. During a one-week period in March 2006 while working on a novel, Jollett learned that his mother was diagnosed with cancer, he also experienced a break-up and was diagnosed with a genetic autoimmune disease which led Jollett to develop two cosmetic conditions: Alopecia areata and Vitiligo. Spurred by these events in his personal life, Jollett turned from writing prose to writing songs as he realized he was composing an album instead of a novel.1
Jollett met drummer Taylor in the summer of 2006 and the two established an immediate rapport. After working on original material together for four months as a two-piece, Jollett asked classically-trained violinist Bulbrook and bassist Harmon to join the band. A situation that Jollett enjoys re-telling with relish, Harmon initially refused. With a background in orchestral and chamber music, Bulbrook since taught herself to play viola and keyboard, while Harmon holds a jazz degree in upright bass performance from the California Institute of the Arts and taught in East Los Angeles as part of the school&lt;U+2019&gt;s Community Arts Partnership. Jollett had met Chen several years earlier, when both lived in San Francisco. Chen was at first asked to join as a keyboardist, but revealed to Jollett that he in fact, played guitar and filled the role as lead guitarist.
To supplement his fiction writing, Jollett had earned income as a freelance writer, contributing to organizations such as NPR, Los Angeles Times, Filter magazine and Men's Health. Since the creation of the band, he has continued to write only fiction. Jollett's short story &quot;The Crack&quot; was published in the Summer 2008 McSweeney's issue 27 sandwiched between short stories by Liz Mandrell and Stephen King.2
The band takes its name from the postmodern novel White Noise, by Don DeLillo,3 which won the National Book Award in 1985. In the book, a chemical spill from a railcar releases a poisonous cloud, dubbed by the military as an &quot;airborne toxic event&quot;. This serves as a metaphorical device for the novel's themes of mortality and media consumption, as the protagonist Jack Gladney is forced to confront the prospect of his own death.
The Airborne Toxic Event played its first show in Echo Park in the fall of 2006, less than a month after it was fully formed. Since then, the band has performed extensively in L.A. and become well known throughout the greater Los Angeles area. In December 2006, Rolling Stone named them one of the &lt;U+201C&gt;Top 25 Bands on MySpace.&lt;U+201D&gt;4 They went on to receive positive responses from music blogs and press, notably L.A. Weekly5 and Los Angeles Times,6 which named the group one of the top three L.A. bands to watch in 2008. Previous bands to receive this distinction include Cold War Kids and Silversun Pickups.
In a rare move, during the band's January 2008 residency at the popular Silver Lake venue Spaceland, Los Angeles Commercial Radio stations KROQ, Indie 103 and KYSR all officially added the as-yet-unsigned band's song &quot;Sometime Around Midnight&quot; to regular rotation. Providence's WBRU, Seattle's KEXP, San Francisco&lt;U+2019&gt;s Live 105, San Diego&lt;U+2019&gt;s 91X, Boston's WFNX, and Sacramento's KWOD 106.5 also showed significant support for the group.
On April 24, 2008 the band made its national television debut as the musical guest on the late-night NBC talk show Last Call with Carson Daly.7 After an extensive courtship from major labels, the Airborne Toxic Event signed with the indie imprint Majordomo Records in April 2008. Their first full-length record was released in the U.S. on August 5, 2008.
In August 2008, the band performed a three-song live video set for LiveDaily Sessions, including the songs &quot;This Losing&quot;, &quot;Sometime Around Midnight&quot; and &quot;Gasoline&quot;,8 which premiered on August 18, 2008.
On March 10, 2009 U2 played some of their favorite songs on a radio program hosted by Shirley Manson of Garbage. Bass player Adam Clayton chose &quot;Sometime Around Midnight&quot; as his choice, commenting that he felt he would be listening to their album the rest of the year.
The video to 'Happiness Is Overrated' was posted on ClashMusic.com on June 12, 2009. 9
&quot;Sometime Around Midnight&quot; is played and credited during the Eagle Eye film, and &quot;Gasoline&quot; is part of the Band Hero video game soundtrack.
Discography
Albums/EPs

Does This Mean You're Moving On? EP (2007 US, 2008 UK)
The Airborne Toxic Event (2008 US, 2009 UK) #108 US, #35 UK, #1 Billboard Top Heatseekers for the week of May 2, 2009 10
Happiness is Overrated EP (2009 UK, Europe)

Singles



Year
Song
Chart peaks
Album




 US
11
 US Mod12
 UK



2007
&quot;Does This Mean You're Moving On?&quot;
&lt;U+2014&gt;
&lt;U+2014&gt;








2008
&quot;Gasoline&quot;
&lt;U+2014&gt;
&lt;U+2014&gt;


&quot;Sometime Around Midnight&quot;
115
4
33


2009
&quot;Happiness is Overrated&quot;
&lt;U+2014&gt;
&lt;U+2014&gt;


&quot;Wishing Well&quot;
&lt;U+2014&gt;
21
&lt;U+2014&gt;


&quot;Does This Mean You're Moving On?&quot; (re-release)
&lt;U+2014&gt;
34
&lt;U+2014&gt;


&quot;&lt;U+2014&gt;&quot; denotes a release that did not chart.












Music videos

&quot;Does This Mean You're Moving On?&quot; (2007, Directed by Jason Wishnow)
&quot;Sometime Around Midnight&quot; (2008, Directed by Jason Wishnow)
&quot;Gasoline&quot; (2008)
&quot;Sometime Around Midnight&quot; (2009, New Version, Directed by D.J. Caruso)
&quot;Happiness is Overrated&quot; (2009, Directed by Jon Danovic)

Live performances
The band has played extensively throughout the United States and the United Kingdom. The group has supported Franz Ferdinand, Kaiser Chiefs, The Fratellis, Silversun Pickups, Ima Robot and Razorlight.
The Airborne Toxic Event played the CMJ Music Marathon in 2006 and 2007, Brighton's 2007 The Great Escape Festival, and Austin's 2008 South by Southwest Music Conference. In the fall of 2008, the band embarked on a U.S. tour with The Fratellis and Electric Touch. During that year, the band also performed at a number of festivals, including Live 105's BFD in Mountain View, California, the San Francisco and Philadelphia installments of the Download Festival, the Monolith Festival at the Red Rocks Amphitheater in Colorado, the Virgin Festival in Toronto, the Capitol Hill Block Party in Seattle, and the Pemberton Festival in Pemberton, British Columbia. The band also played two shows in London, UK, in July. In addition, the group performed at Edgefest in September 2008, hosted by the Phoenix, Arizona radio station The Edge 103.9.
The band played a &quot;30 Shows in 30 Days&quot; U.K. tour in November 2008, which included a month-long residency at the Dublin Castle, located in London's Camden Town. The other cities visited on this tour include Derby, York, Birmingham, Northampton, Leicester, Aldershot, Yeovil, Hayle, Southampton, Liverpool, Carlisle, Middlesbrough, Manchester, Hull, Leeds, Oxford, Brighton, Nottingham, Barrow-in-Furness, Stoke-on-Trent, Cardiff, Bristol, Sheffield, Preston, Dundee, Glasgow, and Fife.
The Airborne Toxic Event has performed frequently on late night talk shows. Along with their television debut on Last Call with Carson Daly, the band performed on Late Night with Conan O'Brien on August 1, 2008, on the Late Show with David Letterman on January 16, 2009, on The Tonight Show with Jay Leno on April 14, 2009, and on Jimmy Kimmel Live! on May 14, 2009. Additionally, on May 20, 2009, an entire episode of Last Call with Carson Daly was devoted to The Airborne Toxic Event, featuring interviews and excerpts from a show at the Glass House in Pomona, California.13
They went on an extensive tour of the UK, France, and North America that stretched from January to April 2009. For the North American leg of the tour, they were supported by the Henry Clay People, from Los Angeles, Alberta Cross, from New York, and Rademacher, from Fresno, California.
During late April and early May 2009, the band toured throughout the UK and mainland Europe, playing such cities as Berlin, Hamburg, Hasselt, Cologne, Paris, Copenhagen, Amsterdam, Coventry, Dublin, and London. On the same tour, the group supported Razorlight for two dates, at the O2 arena and the Manchester Evening News Arena (M.E.N. Arena).
The Airborne Toxic Event was among the bands performing at the 2009 South by Southwest Music Conference and also played the main stage at the 10th anniversary edition of the Coachella Valley Music and Arts Festival in April 2009. In addition, the band played at the 2009 Sasquatch! Music Festival in May, held at the Gorge Amphitheater in George, Washington, and played at Lollapalooza at Grant Park in Chicago in August and Summerfest at Henry Maier Festival Park in Milwaukee, Wisconsin.They played at The Crofoot in Pontiac/Detroit Michigan and sold out the show. There next stop from there was Chicago. The band most recently played at the Jisan Valley Rock Festival in South Korea and the Fuji Rock Festival in Japan.
The group is scheduled to perform at a number of U.K. festivals this summer, including T in the Park in Scotland, Summer Sundae in Leicester, and the Latitude Festival in Suffolk. They are also slated to play at Oxegen in Ireland. As for the fall, The Airborne Toxic Event will embark on a second US and Europe tour. They were also due to play in Australia and New Zealand for the very first time, however this was cancelled due to Mikel contracting bronchitis. The supporting acts for this tour will be Red Cortez and The Henry Clay People.
The concluding act of their Fall 2009 tour will be a December 4th performance at the Walt Disney Concert Hall in Los Angeles, California. The band will be performing as part of the West Coast, Left Coast festival.
The band is also scheduled to ring in the New Year in Chicago at the River East Arts Center.
Pitchfork Media controversy
Upon release of The Airborne Toxic Event's self-titled 2008 album, Ian Cohen of Pitchfork Media gave the album 1.6 out of 10.0,14 saying that the band succeeds in synthesizing only the worst aspects of such influences as Arcade Fire, Interpol, Bright Eyes, and The Strokes. The band released a statement saying they do not take reviews too seriously and criticized Pitchfork for basing their critiques on &quot;a band's ability to match a certain indie rock aesthetic&quot; rather than a band's other merits, and claiming that much of the review &quot;reads less like a record review and more like a diatribe against a set of ill-considered and borderline offensive preconceptions about Los Angeles&quot;.15
References

External links


pre-Lollapalooza 2009 interview with LP33.tv
UK Website
Interview at rocksellout.com
The Airborne Toxic Event Interview - presented by Axe


Category:American indie rock groups Category:Musical groups from Los Angeles, California Category:Musical quintets Category:Island Records artists



↩
The McSweeney's Store: Issue 27↩
Music Vice - interview with the band discussing the origins of their name, among other things↩
Rolling Stone Declares the 25 Best Bands on MySpace : Rolling Stone : Rock and Roll Daily↩
LA Weekly - Music - The Airborne Toxic Event - Alie Ward - The Essential Online Resource for Los Angeles↩
Buzz Bands: Los Angeles Times↩
↩
Video performance of &quot;This Losing&quot;, &quot;Sometime Around Midnight&quot; and &quot;Gasoline&quot; by The Airborne Toxic Event at LiveDaily Sessions↩
http://www.clashmusic.com/feature/watch-new-airborne-toxic-event-video↩
Billboard - Updated Album Charts from the Most Trusted Music Magazine↩
Billboard.com. Retrieved on April 14, 2009.↩
&quot;Artist Chart History - The Airborne Toxic Event - Singles&quot; Billboard.com. Retrieved on April 14, 2009.↩
Carson Daly tonight&lt;U+2026&gt; | The Airborne Toxic Event↩
Pitchfork: The Airborne Toxic Event↩
TheAirborneToxicEvent.com - An Open Letter to Pitchfork Media from the Airborne Toxic Event, 2008↩


