




Easter Island (, ) is a Polynesian island in the southeastern Pacific Ocean, at the southeasternmost point of the Polynesian Triangle. Easter Island is famous for its 887 extant monumental statues, called moai, created by the early Rapa Nui people. In 1995, UNESCO named Easter Island a World Heritage Site, with much of the island protected within Rapa Nui National Park.
Polynesian people settled on Easter Island in the first millennium CE, and created a thriving culture, as evidenced by the moai and other artifacts. However, human activity, the introduction of the Polynesian rat and overpopulation led to gradual deforestation and extinction of natural resources, which caused the demise of the Rapa Nui civilization. By the time of European arrival in 1722, the island's population had dropped to 2,000&lt;U+2013&gt;3,000 from a high of approximately 15,000 just a century earlier. Diseases carried by European sailors and Peruvian slave raiding of the 1860s further reduced the Rapa Nui population, down to 111 in 1877.1
Easter Island is one of the most remote inhabited islands in the world.2 The nearest inhabited land (50 residents) is Pitcairn Island  away, the nearest town with a population over 500 is Rikitea on island Mangareva  away, and the nearest continental point lies in central Chile,  away.
Easter Island is a special territory of Chile that was annexed in 1888. Administratively, it belongs to the Valpara&lt;U+00ED&gt;so Region and more specifically, is the only commune of the Province Isla de Pascua.3 According to the 2012 census, it has about 5,800 residents, of which some 60% are descendants of the aboriginal Rapa Nui.
Name
The name &quot;Easter Island&quot; was given by the island's first recorded European visitor, the Dutch explorer Jacob Roggeveen, who encountered it on Easter Sunday (5 April4) 1722, while searching for Davis or David's island. Roggeveen named it Paasch-Eyland (18th century Dutch for &quot;Easter Island&quot;).5 The island's official Spanish name, Isla de Pascua, also means &quot;Easter Island&quot;.
The current Polynesian name of the island, Rapa Nui &quot;Big Rapa&quot;, was coined after the slave raids of the early 1860s, and refers to the island's topographic resemblance to the island of Rapa in the Bass Islands of the Austral Islands group.6 However Thor Heyerdahl argued that Rapa was the original name of Easter Island, and that Rapa Iti was named by refugees from there.7
The phrase Te pito o te henua has been said to be the original name of the island since William Churchill (1912) gave it the romantic translation &quot;Land's End&quot; in his Voyage &lt;U+00E0&gt; l'&lt;U+00CE&gt;le de P&lt;U+00E2&gt;ques, published in 1877. William inquired about the phrase and was told that there were three te pito o te henua, these being the three capes (land's ends) of the island. He was unable to elicit a Polynesian name for the island itself, and concluded that there may not have been one.8
According to Barthel (1974), oral tradition has it that the island was first named Te pito o te kainga a Hau Maka &quot;The little piece of land of Hau Maka&quot;.9 However, there are two words pronounced pito in Rapa Nui, one meaning 'end' and one 'navel', and the phrase can thus also mean &quot;the Navel of the World&quot;. This was apparently its actual meaning: Alphonse Pinart gave it the actual translation &quot;the Navel of the World&quot;. Another name, Mata ki te rangi, means &quot;Eyes looking to the sky&quot;.10
History


The history of Easter Island is rich and controversial. Its inhabitants have endured famines, epidemics, civil war, slave raids, colonialism, and near deforestation; its population declined precipitously more than once.
Estimated dates of initial settlement of Easter Island have ranged from 300 to 1200 CE, approximately coinciding with the arrival of the first settlers in Hawaii. Rectifications in radiocarbon dating have changed almost all of the previously posited early settlement dates in Polynesia. Rapa Nui has more recently been considered to have been settled in the narrower range of 700 to 1100 CE. An ongoing study by archaeologists Terry Hunt and Carl Lipo suggests a still-later date: &quot;Radiocarbon dates for the earliest stratigraphic layers at Anakena, Easter Island, and analysis of previous radiocarbon dates imply that the island was colonized late, about 1200 CE. Significant ecological impacts and major cultural investments in monumental architecture and statuary thus began soon after initial settlement.&quot;1112
According to oral tradition, the first settlement was at Anakena. Jared Diamond notes that the Caleta Anakena landing point provides the best shelter from prevailing swells, as well as a sandy beach for canoe landings and launchings, so it seems likely to have been an early place of settlement.13 However, this hypothesis contradicts radiocarbon dating, according to which other sites preceded Anakena by many years, especially the Tahai, whose radiocarbon dates precede Anakena's by several centuries.
The island was most likely populated by Polynesians who navigated in canoes or catamarans from the Gambier Islands (Mangareva,  away) or the Marquesas Islands,  away. When James Cook visited the island, one of his crew members, a Polynesian from Bora Bora, was able to communicate with the Rapa Nui. The language most similar to Rapa Nui is Mangarevan with an 80% similarity in vocabulary. In 1999, a voyage with reconstructed Polynesian boats was able to reach Easter Island from Mangareva in 19 days.14
 According to oral traditions recorded by missionaries in the 1860s, the island originally had a strong class system, with an ariki, high chief, wielding great power over nine other clans and their respective chiefs. The high chief was the eldest descendent through first-born lines of the island's legendary founder, Hotu Matu'a. The most visible element in the culture was the production of massive statues called moai that some believe represented deified ancestors. According to National Geographic: &quot;Most scholars suspect that the moai were created to honor ancestors, chiefs, or other important personages, However, no written and little oral history exists on the island, so it&lt;U+2019&gt;s impossible to be certain.&quot; 15
It was believed that the living had a symbiotic relationship with the dead where the dead provided everything that the living needed (health, fertility of land and animals, fortune etc.) and the living, through offerings provided the dead with a better place in the spirit world. Most settlements were located on the coast and most moai were erected along the coastline, watching over their descendants in the settlements before them, with their backs toward the spirit world in the sea.
Diamond suggested that cannibalism took place on Easter Island after the construction of the Moai contributed to environmental degradation when extreme deforestation destabilized an already precarious ecosystem.16 Archeological record shows that at the time of the initial settlement the island was home to many species of trees, including at least three species which grew up to 50 feet or more: Paschalococos &lt;U+2013&gt; possibly the largest palm trees in the world at the time, Alphitonia zizyphoides, and Elaeocarpus rarotongensis, as well as at least six species of native land birds. Barbara A. West wrote, &quot;Sometime before the arrival of Europeans on Easter Island, the Rapanui experienced a tremendous upheaval in their social system brought about by a change in their island's ecology... By the time of European arrival in 1722, the island's population had dropped to 2,000&lt;U+2013&gt;3,000 from a high of approximately 15,000 just a century earlier.&quot;17
By that time, 21 species of trees and all species of land birds went extinct through some combination of overharvesting/overhunting, rat predation, and climate change. The island was largely deforested, and it did not have any trees more than 10 feet tall. Loss of large trees meant that residents were no longer able to build seaworthy vessels, significantly diminishing their fishing abilities. This was further exacerbated by the loss of land birds and the collapse in seabird populations as a potential source of food. By the 18th century, residents of the island were largely sustained by farming, with domestic chickens as the primary source of protein.18
As the island became overpopulated and resources diminished, warriors known as matatoa gained more power and the Ancestor Cult ended, making way for the Bird Man Cult. Beverly Haun wrote, &quot;The concept of mana (power) invested in hereditary leaders was recast into the person of the birdman, apparently beginning circa 1540, and coinciding with the final vestiges of the moai period.&quot;19 This cult maintained that, although the ancestors still provided for their descendants, the medium through which the living could contact the dead was no longer statues, but human beings chosen through a competition. The god responsible for creating humans, Makemake, played an important role in this process. Katherine Routledge, who systematically collected the island's traditions in her 1919 expedition,20 showed that the competitions for Bird Man (Rapanui: tangata manu) started around 1760, after the arrival of the first Europeans, and ended in 1878, with the construction of the first church by Roman Catholic missionaries who formally arrived in 1864. Petroglyphs representing Bird Men on Easter Island are exactly the same as some in Hawaii, indicating that this concept was probably brought by the original settlers; only the competition itself was unique to Easter Island.
European accounts from 1722 and 1770 mention standing statues, but Cook's 1774 expedition noted that several moai were lying face down, having been toppled in war.
 According to Diamond and Heyerdahl's version of the island's history, the huri mo'ai&lt;U+2014&gt;&quot;statue-toppling&quot;&lt;U+2014&gt;continued into the 1830s as a part of fierce internal wars. By 1838 the only standing moai were on the slopes of Rano Raraku, in Hoa Hakananai'a in Orongo, and Ariki Paro in Ahu Te Pito Kura. A study headed by Douglas Owsley published in 1994 asserted that there is little archaeological evidence of pre-European societal collapse. Bone pathology and osteometric data from islanders of that period clearly suggest few fatalities can be attributed directly to violence.21
The first-recorded European contact with the island was on 5 April (Easter Sunday), 1722, when Dutch navigator Jacob Roggeveen visited the island for a week and estimated a population of 2,000 to 3,000 inhabitants. The number may have been greater, since some may have been frightened into hiding by a misunderstanding that led Roggeveen's men to fire on the natives, killing more than a dozen and wounding several more. The next foreign visitors (on 15 November 1770) were two Spanish ships, San Lorenzo and Santa Rosalia.
The Spanish reported the island as largely uncultivated, whose seashore was lined with stone statues. Four years later, in 1774, British explorer James Cook visited Easter Island; he reported that some statues had fallen over. The British ship  arrived in 1825 and reported seeing no standing statues. Easter Island was approached many times during the 19th century, but by then the islanders had become openly hostile to any attempt to land, and very little new information was reported before the 1860s.
19th century
A series of devastating events killed or removed most of the population in the 1860s. In December 1862, Peruvian slave raiders struck. Violent abductions continued for several months, eventually capturing around 1,500 men and women, half of the island's population.22 Among those captured were the island's paramount chief, his heir, and those who knew how to read and write the rongorongo script, the only Polynesian script to have been found to date.
When the slave raiders were forced to repatriate the people they had kidnapped, they disembarked carriers of smallpox together with a few survivors on each of the islands. This created devastating epidemics from Easter Island to the Marquesas islands. Easter Island's population was reduced to the point where some of the dead were not even buried.
Tuberculosis, introduced by whalers in the mid-19th century, had already killed several islanders when the first Christian missionary, Eug&lt;U+00E8&gt;ne Eyraud, died from this disease in 1867. About a quarter of the island's population succumbed along with him. In the following years, the managers of the sheep ranch and the missionaries started buying the newly available lands of the deceased, and this led to great confrontations between natives and settlers.
 Jean-Baptiste Dutrou-Bornier bought up all of the island apart from the missionaries' area around Hanga Roa and moved a couple of hundred Rapanui to Tahiti to work for his backers. In 1871 the missionaries, having fallen out with Dutrou-Bornier, evacuated all but 171 Rapanui to the Gambier islands.23 Those who remained were mostly older men. Six years later, only 111 people lived on Easter Island, and only 36 of them had any offspring.24 From that point on the island's population slowly recovered. But with over 97% of the population dead or gone in less than a decade, much of the island's cultural knowledge had been lost.
Alexander Salmon, Jr., a son of an English Jewish merchant and a P&lt;U+014D&gt;mare Dynasty princess, eventually worked to repatriate workers from his inherited copra plantation. He eventually bought up all lands on the island with the exception of the mission, and was its sole employer. He worked to develop tourism on the island, and was the principal informant for the British and German archaeological expeditions for the island. He sent several pieces of genuine Rongorongo to his niece's husband, the German consul in Valpara&lt;U+00ED&gt;so, Chile. Salmon sold the Brander Easter Island holdings to the Chilean government in 1888 January 2 and signed as a witness to the cession of the island. He returned to Tahiti in December of that year. He effectively ruled the island from 1878 until his cession to Chile in 1888.
Easter Island was annexed by Chile on 9 September 1888, by Policarpo Toro, by means of the &quot;Treaty of Annexation of the Island&quot; (Tratado de Anexi&lt;U+00F3&gt;n de la isla). Toro, then representing the government of Chile signed with Atamu Tekena, designated &quot;King&quot; by the Chilean government after the paramount chief and his heir had died. The validity of this treaty is still contested by some Rapanui. Officially, Chile purchased the nearly all encompassing Mason-Brander sheep ranch, comprised from lands purchased from the descendants of Rapanui who died during the epidemics, and then claimed sovereignty over the island.
20th century
Until the 1960s the surviving Rapanui were confined to Hanga Roa. The rest of the island was rented to the Williamson-Balfour Company as a sheep farm until 1953.25 The island was then managed by the Chilean Navy until 1966, at which point the island was reopened in its entirety. In 1966 the Rapanui were given Chilean citizenship.26
 Following the 1973 Chilean coup d'&lt;U+00E9&gt;tat that brought Augusto Pinochet to power, Easter Island was placed under martial law. Tourism slowed down and private property was &quot;restored&quot;. During his time in power, Pinochet visited Easter Island on three occasions. The military built a number of new military facilities and a new city hall.27
After an agreement in 1985 between Chile and United States, the runway at Mataveri International Airport was enlarged and was inaugurated in 1987. The runway was expanded  reaching . Pinochet is reported to have refused to attend the inauguration in protest of pressures from the United States to attend human rights cases.28
21st century
On 30 July 2007, a constitutional reform gave Easter Island and the Juan Fern&lt;U+00E1&gt;ndez Islands (also known as Robinson Crusoe Island) the status of &quot;special territories&quot; of Chile. Pending the enactment of a special charter, the island continued to be governed as a province of the V Region of Valpara&lt;U+00ED&gt;so.29
A total solar eclipse visible from Easter Island occurred for the first time in over 1300 years on 11 July 2010, at 18:15:15.30
Species of fish were collected in Easter Island for one month in different habitats including shallow lava pools, depths of 43 meters, and deep waters. Within these habitats, two holotypes and paratypes, Antennarius randalli and Antennarius moai, were discovered. These are considered frog-fish because of their characteristics: &quot;12 dorsal rays, last two or three branched; bony part of first dorsal spine slightly shorter than second dorsal spine; body without bold zebra-like markings; caudal peduncle short,but distinct; last pelvic ray divided; pectoral rays 11 or 12&quot; . 31
Indigenous rights movement
Starting in August 2010, members of the indigenous Hitorangi clan occupied the Hangaroa Eco Village and Spa.32 The occupiers allege that the hotel was bought from the Pinochet government, in violation of a Chilean agreement with the indigenous Rapa Nui, in the 1990s.33 The occupiers say their ancestors had been cheated into giving up the land.34 According to a BBC report, on 3 December 2010, at least 25 people were injured when Chilean police using pellet guns attempted to evict from these buildings a group of Rapa Nui who had claimed that the land the buildings stood on had been illegally taken from their ancestors.35
In January 2011, the UN's Special Rapporteur on Indigenous People, James Anaya, expressed concern about the treatment of the indigenous Rapa Nui by the Chilean government, urging Chile to &quot;make every effort to conduct a dialogue in good faith with representatives of the Rapa Nui people to solve, as soon as possible the real underlying problems that explain the current situation&quot;.36
The incident ended in February 2011, when up to 50 armed police broke into the hotel to remove the final five occupiers. They were arrested by the government and no injuries were reported.37
Geography

Easter Island, Salas y G&lt;U+00F3&gt;mez Islands, South America and the islands in between

Easter Island is one of the world's most isolated inhabited islands. Its closest inhabited neighbor is Pitcairn Island,  to the west, with fewer than 100 inhabitants. The nearest continental point lies in central Chile near Concepci&lt;U+00F3&gt;n, at . Easter Island's latitude is similar to that of Caldera, Chile, and it lies  west of continental Chile at its nearest point (between Lota and Lebu in the Biob&lt;U+00ED&gt;o Region). Isla Salas y G&lt;U+00F3&gt;mez,  to the east, is closer but is uninhabited. Archipelago Tristan da Cunha in the southern Atlantic competes for the title of the most remote island, lying  from Saint Helena island and  from South African coast.
The island is about  long by  at its widest point; its overall shape is triangular. It has an area of , and a maximum altitude of . There are three Rano (freshwater crater lakes), at Rano Kau, Rano Raraku and Rano Aroi, near the summit of Terevaka, but no permanent streams or rivers.
Geology
 Easter Island is a volcanic high island, consisting mainly of three extinct coalesced volcanoes: Terevaka (altitude 507 metres) forms the bulk of the island, while two other volcanoes, Poike and Rano Kau, form the eastern and southern headlands and give the island its roughly triangular shape. Lesser cones and other volcanic features include the crater Rano Raraku, the cinder cone Puna Pau and many volcanic caves including lava tubes.
  Poike used to be a separate island until volcanic material from Terevaka united it to the larger whole. The island is dominated by hawaiite and basalt flows which are rich in iron and show affinity with igneous rocks found in the Gal&lt;U+00E1&gt;pagos Islands.38
Easter Island and surrounding islets such as Motu Nui and Motu Iti form the summit of a large volcanic mountain rising over  from the sea bed. The mountain is part of the Sala y G&lt;U+00F3&gt;mez Ridge, a (mostly submarine) mountain range with dozens of seamounts, formed by the Easter hotspot. The range begins with Pukao and next Moai, two seamounts to the west of Easter Island, and extends  east to the Nazca Ridge.39 The ridge was formed by the Nazca Plate floating over the Easter hotspot.40 The movement of Nazca and formerly the Farallon Plate over the hotspot has created a long underwater ridge, the Nazca Ridge, whose eastern end is being subducted under Peru. Only at Easter Island, its surrounding islets and Sala y G&lt;U+00F3&gt;mez does the Sala y G&lt;U+00F3&gt;mez Ridge form dry land.
Pukao, Moai and Easter Island were formed in the last 750,000 years and are the ridge's youngest islands. The most recent eruption was a little over 100,000 years ago.
In the first half of the 20th century, steam reportedly came out of the Rano Kau crater wall. This was photographed by the island's manager, Mr. Edmunds.41 According to geologists the last volcanic activity on the island occurred 10,000 years ago.
Climate

Under the K&lt;U+00F6&gt;ppen climate classification, the climate of Easter Island is classified as a tropical rainforest climate (Af) that borders on a humid subtropical climate. The lowest temperatures are recorded in July and August () and the highest in February (maximum temperature 42), the summer season in the southern hemisphere. Winters are relatively mild. The rainiest month is May, though the island experiences year-round rainfall.43 Easter Island's isolated location exposes it to winds which help to keep the temperature fairly cool. Precipitation averages  per year. Occasionally, heavy rainfall and rainstorms strike the island. These occur mostly in the winter months (June&lt;U+2013&gt;August). Since it is close to the South Pacific High and outside the range of the intertropical convergence zone, cyclones and hurricanes do not occur around Easter island.44 {{-}}

Ecology
Easter Island, together with its closest neighbour, the tiny island of Isla Sala y G&lt;U+00F3&gt;mez  farther east, is recognized by ecologists as a distinct ecoregion, the Rapa Nui subtropical broadleaf forests. The original subtropical moist broadleaf forests are now gone, but paleobotanical studies of fossil pollen and tree moulds left by lava flows indicate that the island was formerly forested, with a range of trees, shrubs, ferns, and grasses. A large extinct palm, Paschalococos disperta, related to the Chilean wine palm (Jubaea chilensis), was one of the dominant trees as attested by fossil evidence. Like its Chilean counterpart it probably took close to 100 years to reach adult height. The Polynesian rat, which the original settlers brought with them, played a very important role in the disappearance of the Rapanui palm. Although some may believe that rats played a major role in the degradation of the forest, less than 10% of palm nuts show teeth marks from rats. The remains of palm stumps in different places indicate that humans caused the trees to fall because in large areas, the stumps were cut efficiently.45
The clearance of the palms to make the settlements led to their extinction almost 350 years ago.46 The toromiro tree (Sophora toromiro) was prehistorically present on Easter Island, but is now extinct in the wild. However the Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew and the G&lt;U+00F6&gt;teborg Botanical Garden are jointly leading a scientific program to reintroduce the toromiro to Easter Island. With the palm and the toromiro virtually gone, there was considerably less rainfall as a result of less condensation. After the island was used to feed thousands of sheep for almost a century, by the mid-1900s the island was mostly covered in grassland with nga'atu or bulrush (Schoenoplectus californicus tatora) in the crater lakes of Rano Raraku and Rano Kau. The presence of these reeds, which are called totora in the Andes, was used to support the argument of a South American origin of the statue builders, but pollen analysis of lake sediments shows these reeds have grown on the island for over 30,000 years. Before the arrival of humans, Easter Island had vast seabird colonies containing probably over 30 resident species, perhaps the world's richest.47 Such colonies are no longer found on the main island. Fossil evidence indicates five species of landbirds (two rails, two parrots and a heron), all of which have become extinct.48
File:RapaNui L7 03jan01.jpg|View of Easter Island from space, 2001. The Poike peninsula is on the right. File:RAPA NUI.JPG|Digital recreation of its ancient landscape, with tropical forest and palm trees File:EasterIslandInterior.jpg|View toward the interior of the island File:Easter Island.jpg|View of Rano Kau and Pacific Ocean
The immunosuppressant drug sirolimus was first discovered in the bacterium Streptomyces hygroscopicus in a soil sample from Easter Island. The drug is also known as rapamycin, after Rapa Nui.49 It is now being studied for extending longevity in mice.50 {{-}}
Trees are sparse, rarely forming natural groves, and it has been argued whether native Easter Islanders deforested the island in the process of erecting their statues,51 and in providing sustenance for an overpopulated island. Experimental archaeology demonstrated that some statues certainly could have been placed on &quot;Y&quot; shaped wooden frames called miro manga erua and then pulled to their final destinations on ceremonial sites.52 Other theories involve the use of &quot;ladders&quot; (parallel wooden rails) over which the statues could have been dragged.53 Rapanui traditions metaphorically refer to spiritual power (mana) as the means by which the moai were &quot;walked&quot; from the quarry. Recent experimental recreations have proven that it is fully possible that the moai were literally walked from their quarries to their final positions by use of ropes, casting doubt on the role that their existence plays in the environmental collapse of the island.54
Given the island's southern latitude, the climatic effects of the Little Ice Age (about 1650 to 1850) may have exacerbated deforestation, although this remains speculative.55 Many researchers56 point to the climatic downtrend caused by the Little Ice Age as a contributing factor to resource stress and to the palm tree's disappearance. Experts, however, do not agree on when exactly the island's palms became extinct.
Jared Diamond dismisses past climate change as a dominant cause of the island's deforestation in his book Collapse which assesses the collapse of the ancient Easter Islanders. Influenced by Heyerdahl's romantic interpretation of Easter's history (as he acknowledges in chapter 2 of Collapse), Diamond insists that the disappearance of the island's trees seems to coincide with a decline of its civilization around the 17th and 18th centuries. He notes that they stopped making statues at that time and started destroying the ahu. But the link is weakened because the Bird Man cult continued to thrive and survived the great impact caused by the arrival of explorers, whalers, sandalwood traders, and slave raiders.
Midden contents show that the main source of protein was tuna and dolphin. With the loss of the trees, there was a sudden drop in the quantities of fish bones found in middens as the islanders lost the means to construct fishing vessels, coinciding with a large increase in bird bones. This was followed by a decrease in the number of bird bones as birds lost their nesting sites or became extinct. A new style of art from this period shows people with exposed ribs and distended bellies, indicative of malnutrition, and it is around this time that many islanders moved to living in fortified caves and the first signs of warfare and cannibalism appear.
Soil erosion because of lack of trees is apparent in some places. Sediment samples document that up to half of the native plants had become extinct and that the vegetation of the island drastically altered. Polynesians were primarily farmers, not fishermen, and their diet consisted mainly of cultivated staples such as taro root, sweet potato, yams, cassava, and bananas. With no trees to protect them, sea spray led to crop failures exacerbated by a sudden reduction in fresh water flows. There is evidence that the islanders took to planting crops in caves beneath collapsed ceilings and covered the soil with rocks to reduce evaporation. Cannibalism occurred on many Polynesian islands, sometimes in times of plenty as well as famine. Its presence on Easter Island (based on human remains associated with cooking sites, especially in caves) is supported by oral histories.
Benny Peiser57 noted evidence of self-sufficiency when Europeans first arrived. The island still had smaller trees, mainly toromiro, which became extinct in the 20th century probably because of slow growth and changes in the island's ecosystem. Cornelis Bouman, Jakob Roggeveen's captain, stated in his logbook, &quot;... of yams, bananas and small coconut palms we saw little and no other trees or crops.&quot; According to Carl Friedrich Behrens, Roggeveen's officer, &quot;The natives presented palm branches as peace offerings.&quot; According to ethnographer Alfred M&lt;U+00E8&gt;traux, the most common type of house was called &quot;hare paenga&quot; (and is known today as &quot;boat house&quot;) because the roof resembled an overturned boat. The foundations of the houses were made of buried basalt slabs with holes for wooden beams to connect with each other throughout the width of the house. These were then covered with a layer of totora reed, followed by a layer of woven sugarcane leaves, and lastly a layer of woven grass. There were reports by European visitors who said they had seen &quot;boles of large palm trees&quot;.
Peiser claims that these reports indicate that large trees existed at that time, which is perhaps contradicted by the Bouman quote above. Plantations were often located farther inland, next to foothills, inside open-ceiling lava tubes, and in other places protected from the strong salt winds and salt spray affecting areas closer to the coast. It is possible many of the Europeans did not venture inland. The statue quarry, only one kilometre () from the coast with an impressive cliff  high, was not explored by Europeans until well into the 19th century.

Easter Island has suffered from heavy soil erosion in recent centuries, perhaps aggravated by agriculture and massive deforestation. This process seems to have been gradual and may have been aggravated by sheep farming throughout most of the 20th century. Jakob Roggeveen reported that Easter Island was exceptionally fertile. &quot;Fowls are the only animals they keep. They cultivate bananas, sugar cane, and above all sweet potatoes.&quot; In 1786 Jean-Fran&lt;U+00E7&gt;ois de La P&lt;U+00E9&gt;rouse visited Easter Island and his gardener declared that &quot;three days' work a year&quot; would be enough to support the population.
Rollin, a major in the P&lt;U+00E9&gt;rouse expedition, wrote, &quot;Instead of meeting with men exhausted by famine... I found, on the contrary, a considerable population, with more beauty and grace than I afterwards met in any other island; and a soil, which, with very little labor, furnished excellent provisions, and in an abundance more than sufficient for the consumption of the inhabitants.&quot;58
According to Diamond, the oral traditions (the veracity of which has been questioned by Routledge, Lavachery, M&lt;U+00E8&gt;traux, Peiser and others) of the current islanders seem obsessed with cannibalism, which he offers as evidence supporting a rapid collapse. For example, he states, to severely insult an enemy one would say, &quot;The flesh of your mother sticks between my teeth.&quot; This, Diamond asserts, means the food supply of the people ultimately ran out.59 Cannibalism, however, was widespread across Polynesian cultures.60 Human bones have not been found in earth ovens other than those behind the religious platforms, indicating that cannibalism in Easter Island was a ritualistic practice. Contemporary ethnographic research has proven there is scarcely any tangible evidence for widespread cannibalism anywhere and at any time on the Island.61 The first scientific exploration of Easter Island (1914) recorded that the indigenous population strongly rejected allegations that they or their ancestors had been cannibals.62
Culture

Bird paintings in the cave called &quot;Cave of the Men Eaters&quot;

Mythology

The most important myths are:

Tangata manu, the Birdman cult which was practiced until the 1860s.
Makemake, an important god.
Aku-aku, the guardians of the sacred family caves.
Moai-kava-kava a ghost man of the Hanau epe (long-ears.)
Hekai ite umu pare haonga takapu Hanau epe kai noruego, the sacred chant to appease the aku-aku before entering a family cave.

Stone work
The Rapa Nui people had a Stone Age culture and made extensive use of several different types of local stone:

Basalt, a hard, dense stone used for toki and at least one of the moai.
Obsidian, a volcanic glass with sharp edges used for sharp-edged implements such as Mataa and also for the black pupils of the eyes of the moai.
Red scoria from Puna Pau, a very light red stone used for the pukao and a few moai.
Tuff from Rano Raraku, a much more easily worked rock than basalt, and was used for most of the moai.

Statues

The large stone statues, or moai, for which Easter Island is famous, were carved in the period 1100&lt;U+2013&gt;1680 CE (rectified radio-carbon dates).63 A total of 887 monolithic stone statues have been inventoried on the island and in museum collections so far.64 Although often identified as &quot;Easter Island heads&quot;, the statues have torsos, most of them ending at the top of the thighs, although a small number are complete figures that kneel on bent knees with their hands over their stomachs.6566 Some upright moai have become buried up to their necks by shifting soils.
Almost all (95%) moai were carved from compressed, easily worked solidified volcanic ash or tuff found at a single site on the side of the extinct volcano Rano Raraku. The native islanders who carved them used only stone hand chisels, mainly basalt toki, which lie in place all over the quarry. The stone chisels were sharpened by chipping off a new edge when dulled. The volcanic stone was first wetted to soften it before sculpting began, then again periodically during the process. While many teams worked on different statues at the same time, a single moai took a team of five or six men approximately a year to complete. Each statue represented the deceased head of a lineage.
Only a quarter of the statues were installed, while nearly half remained in the quarry at Rano Raraku and the rest sat elsewhere, presumably on their way to intended locations. The largest moai raised on a platform is known as &quot;Paro&quot;. It weighs 82 tons and is  long.67 Several other statues of similar weight were transported to several ahu on the North and South coasts.
Possible means by which the statues were moved include employment of a miro manga erua, a Y-shaped sledge with cross pieces, pulled with ropes made from the tough bark of the hau-hau tree,68 and tied around the statue's neck. Anywhere from 180 to 250 men were required for pulling, depending on the size of the moai. Some 50 of the statues were re-erected in modern times. One of the first was on Ahu Ature Huke in Anakena beach in 1958. It was raised using traditional methods during a Heyerdahl expedition.
Another method that might have been used would be to attach ropes to the statue and rock it, tugging it forward as it rocked. This would fit the legend of the Mo'ai 'walking' to their final locations.69 This might have been managed by as few as 15 people. This is supported by the following evidence:
1) The heads of the moai in the quarry are sloped forward whereas the ones moved to final locations are not. This would serve to provide a better centre of gravity for transport.
2) The statues found along the transport roads have wider bases than statues installed on ahu; this would facilitate more stable transport. Studies have also shown fractures along the bases of the statues in transport; these could have arisen from rocking the statue back and forth and placing great pressures on the edges. The statues found mounted on ahu do not have wide bases and stone chips found at the sites suggest they were further modified on placement.
3) The abandoned and fallen statues in proximity to the old roads are found (more often than would be expected from chance) face down when headed down ascending grades, and on their backs when headed uphill. Some were documented standing upright along the old roads, e.g., by a party from Captain Cook's voyage which rested in the shade of a standing statue. This would be consistent with upright transport.
In 2011, a large moai statue was excavated from the ground.70
File:Kneeled moai Easter Island.jpg|Tukuturi, an unusual bearded kneeling moai File:Ahu-Tongariki-2013.jpg|All fifteen standing moai at Ahu Tongariki, excavated and restored in the 1990s File:Ahu-Akivi-1.JPG|Ahu Akivi, one of the few inland ahu, with the only moai facing the ocean
Stone platforms

Two ahu at Hanga Roa. In foreground Ahu Ko Te Riku (with a pukao on its head). In the mid-ground is a side view of an ahu with five moai showing retaining wall, platform, ramp and pavement. The Mataveri end of Hanga Roa is visible in the background with Rano Kau rising above it.

Ahu are stone platforms. Varying greatly in layout, many were reworked during or after the huri mo'ai or statue-toppling era; many became ossuaries; one was dynamited open; and Ahu Tongariki was swept inland by a tsunami. Of the 313 known ahu, 125 carried moai&lt;U+2014&gt;usually just one, probably because of the shortness of the moai period and transportation difficulties. Ahu Tongariki, one kilometer () from Rano Raraku, had the most and tallest moai, 15 in total. Other notable ahu with moai are Ahu Akivi, restored in 1960 by William Mulloy, Nau Nau at Anakena and Tahai. Some moai may have been made from wood and were lost.
The classic elements of ahu design are:

A retaining rear wall several feet high, usually facing the sea
A front wall made of rectangular basalt slabs called paenga
A facia made of red scoria that went over the front wall (platforms built after 1300)
A sloping ramp in the inland part of the platform, extending outward like wings
A pavement of even-sized, round water-worn stones called poro
An alignment of stones before the ramp
A paved plaza before the ahu. This was called marae
Inside the ahu was a fill of rubble.

On top of many ahu would have been:

Moai on squareish &quot;pedestals&quot; looking inland, the ramp with the poro before them.
Pukao or Hau Hiti Rau on the moai heads (platforms built after 1300).
When a ceremony took place, &quot;eyes&quot; were placed on the statues. The whites of the eyes were made of coral, the iris was made of obsidian or red scoria.

Ahu evolved from the traditional Polynesian marae. In this context ahu referred to a small structure sometimes covered with a thatched roof where sacred objects, including statues, were stored. The ahu were usually adjacent to the marae or main central court where ceremonies took place, though on Easter Island ahu and moai evolved to much greater size. There the marae is the unpaved plaza before the ahu. The biggest ahu is  and holds 15 statues, some of which are  high. The filling of an ahu was sourced locally (apart from broken, old moai, fragments of which have also been used in the fill).71 Individual stones are mostly far smaller than the moai, so less work was needed to transport the raw material, but artificially leveling the terrain for the plaza and filling the ahu was laborious.
Ahu are found mostly on the coast, where they are distributed fairly evenly except on the western slopes of Mount Terevaka and the Rano Kau and Poike72 headlands. These are the three areas with the least low-lying coastal land, and apart from Poike the furthest areas from Rano Raraku. One ahu with several moai was recorded on the cliffs at Rano Kau in the 1880s, but had fallen to the beach before the Routledge expedition.73

A Hare Moa, a Chicken House, image cut from a laser scan collected by nonprofit CyArk

Stone walls
One of the highest-quality examples of Easter Island stone masonry is the rear wall of the ahu at Vinapu. Made without mortar by shaping hard basalt rocks of up to seven tons to match each other exactly, it has a superficial similarity to some Inca stone walls in South America.74
Stone houses
Two types of houses are known from the past: hare paenga, a house with an elliptical foundation, made with basalt slabs and covered with a thatched roof that resembled an overturned boat, and hare oka, a round stone structure. Related stone structures called Tupa look very similar to the hare oka, except that the Tupa were inhabited by astronomer-priests and located near the coast, where the movements of the stars could be easily observed. Settlements also contain hare moa (&quot;chicken house&quot;), oblong stone structures that were used to house chickens. The houses at the ceremonial village of Orongo are unique in that they are shaped like hare paenga but are made entirely of flat basalt slabs found inside Rano Kao crater. The entrances to all the houses are very low, and entry requires crawling.
In early times the people of Rapa Nui reportedly sent the dead out to sea in small funerary canoes, as did their Polynesian counterparts in other islands. They later started burying people in secret caves in order to save the bones from desecration by enemies. During the turmoil of the late 18th century, the islanders seem to have started to bury their dead in the space between the belly of a fallen moai and the front wall of the structure. During the time of the epidemics they made mass graves that were semi-pyramidal stone structures.
Petroglyphs
Petroglyphs are pictures carved into rock, and Easter Island has one of the richest collections in all Polynesia. Around 1,000 sites with more than 4,000 petroglyphs are catalogued. Designs and images were carved out of rock for a variety of reasons: to create totems, to mark territory or to memorialize a person or event. There are distinct variations around the island in terms of the frequency of particular themes among petroglyphs, with a concentration of Birdmen at Orongo. Other subjects include sea turtles, Komari (vulvas) and Makemake, the chief god of the Tangata manu or Birdman cult.75
Petroglyphs are also common in the Marquesas islands.
File:Makemake.jpeg|Makemake with two birdmen, carved from red scoria File:Ahu-Tongariki-4-Petroglyph.JPG|Fish petroglyph found near Ahu Tongariki
Caves
The island and neighbouring Motu Nui are riddled with caves, many of which show signs of past human use for planting and as fortifications, including narrowed entrances and crawl spaces with ambush points. Many caves feature in the myths and legends of the Rapa Nui.

Sample of rongorongo

Rongorongo

Easter Island once had an apparent script called rongorongo. Glyphs include pictographic and geometric shapes; the texts were incised in wood in reverse boustrophedon direction. It was first reported by a French missionary, Eug&lt;U+00E8&gt;ne Eyraud, in 1864. At that time, several islanders said they could understand the writing, but according to tradition, only ruling families and priests were ever literate, and none survived the slave raids and subsequent epidemics. Despite numerous attempts, the surviving texts have not been deciphered, and without decipherment it is not certain that they are actually writing. Part of the problem is the small amount that has survived: only two dozen texts, none of which remain on the island. There are also only a couple of similarities with the petroglyphs on the island.76
Wood carving




Skeletal_easter_island_statue.JPG


Fat_wooden_Moai.JPG



Skeletal statuette
Atypical tubby statuette



Wood was scarce on Easter Island during the 18th and 19th centuries, but a number of highly detailed and distinctive carvings have found their way to the world's museums. Particular forms include:77 

Reimiro, a gorget or breast ornament of crescent shape with a head at one or both tips.78 The same design appears on the flag of Rapa Nui. Two Rei Miru at the British Museum are inscribed with Rongorongo.


Moko Miro, a man with a lizard head. The Moko Miro was used as a club because of the legs, which formed a handle shape. If it wasn't held by hand, dancers wore it around their necks during feasts. The Moko Miro would also be placed at the doorway to protect the household from harm. It would be hanging from the roof or set in the ground. The original form had eyes made from white shells, and the pupils were made of obsidian.79


Moai kavakava are male carvings and the Moai Paepae are female carvings.80 These grotesque and highly detailed human figures carved from Toromiro pine, represent ancestors. Sometimes these statues were used for fertility rites. Usually, they are used for harvest celebrations; &quot;the first picking of fruits was heaped around them as offerings&quot;. When the statues were not used, they would be wrapped in bark cloth and kept at home. There were a few times that are reported when the islanders would pick up the figures like dolls and dance with them.81 The earlier figures are rare and generally depict a male figure with an emaciated body and a goatee. The figures' ribs and vertebrae are exposed and many examples show carved glyphs on various parts of the body but more specifically, on the top of the head. The female figures, rarer than the males, depict the body as flat and often with the female's hand lying across the body. The figures, although some were quite large, were worn as ornamental pieces around a tribesman's neck. The more figures worn, the more important the man. The figures have a shiny patina developed from constant handling and contact with human skin.
Ao, a large dancing paddle

21st-century culture
The Rapanui sponsor an annual festival, the Tapati, held since 1975 around the beginning of February to celebrate Rapanui culture. The islanders also maintain a national football team and three discos in the town of Hanga Roa. Other cultural activities include a musical tradition that combines South American and Polynesian influences and woodcarving.
Sports
The Chilean leg of the Red Bull Cliff Diving World Series takes place on the Island of Rapa Nui.
Demography

2012 census
Population at the 2012 census was 5,761 (increased from 3,791 in 2002).82 In 2002, 60% were Rapanui, Chileans of European or mixed European and Amerindian descent were 39% of the population, and the remaining 1% were Native Americans from mainland Chile.83 Population density on Easter Island in 2012 is only .
File:TAMURE.png|Polynesian dancing with feather costumes is on the tourist itinerary. File:HangaroaAlcald&lt;U+00ED&gt;a.jpg|Hanga Roa town hall File:EasterIslandsFishingBoats.jpg|Fishing boats on Easter Island File:Hanga Roa Catholic Church exterior 1.JPG|Front view of the Catholic Church, Hanga Roa, Rapa Nui (Easter Island) File:Hanga Roa Catholic Church exterior 2.JPG|Catholic Church, Hanga Roa, Rapa Nui (Easter Island) File:Hanga Roa Catholic Church interior.JPG|Interior view of the Catholic Church in Hanga Roa, Rapa Nui (Easter Island)
Demographic history
The 1982 population was 1,936. The increase in population in the last census was partly caused by the arrival of people of European or mixed European and Native American descent from the Chilean mainland. However, most married a Rapanui spouse. Around 70% of the population were natives. Estimates of the pre-European population range from 7&lt;U+2013&gt;17,000. Easter Island's all-time low of 111 inhabitants was reported in 1877. Out of these 111 Rapanui, only 36 had descendants, but all of today's Rapanui claim descent from those 36.
Administration and legal status
Easter Island shares with Juan Fern&lt;U+00E1&gt;ndez Islands the constitutional status of &quot;special territory&quot; of Chile, granted in 2007. As of 2011 a special charter for the island was under discussion in the Chilean Congress.
Administratively, the island is a province of the Valpara&lt;U+00ED&gt;so Region and contains a single commune (comuna). Both the province and the commune are called Isla de Pascua and encompass the whole island and its surrounding islets and rocks, plus Isla Salas y G&lt;U+00F3&gt;mez, some  to the east.84
Authorities and representatives
Within the electoral divisions of Chile, Easter Island belongs to the 13th electoral district and 6th senatorial constituency. The people are represented in the Chamber of Deputies by Joaqu&lt;U+00ED&gt;n Godoy (RN) and Aldo Cornejo (PDC). Constituents are also represented by two senators, Francisco Chahu&lt;U+00E1&gt;n (RN) and Ricardo Lagos Weber (PPD).

Provincial Governor: Carmen Cardinali Paoa (2010&lt;U+2013&gt;). Appointed by the President of the Republic.8586
Mayor: Luz Zasso Paoa (PDC), directly elected for four years (2008&lt;U+2013&gt;2012). Municipality located in Hanga Roa.
Municipal council, directly elected for four years (2008&lt;U+2013&gt;2012):

Marta Raquel Hotus Tuki (PDC)
Ximena Trengove Vallejos (PDC)
Julio Araki Tepano (UDI)
Eliana Amelia Olivares San Juan (UDI)
Alberto Hotus Ch&lt;U+00E1&gt;vez (PPD)
Marcelo Pont Hill (PPD)


Notable people

Hotu Matu&lt;U+02BB&gt;a&lt;U+2014&gt;island founder
King Nga'ara&lt;U+2014&gt;one of the last &lt;U+2018&gt;ariki
Kings of Easter Island
Thor Heyerdahl&lt;U+2014&gt;ethnographer
Fr Sebastian Englert, OFM Cap.&lt;U+2014&gt;missionary and ethnologist
William Mulloy&lt;U+2014&gt;archaeologist
Pedro Pablo Edmunds Paoa&lt;U+2014&gt;former Governor
Melania Carolina Hotu Hey&lt;U+2014&gt;former Governor (2006&lt;U+2013&gt;2010)
Juan Edmunds Rapahango&lt;U+2014&gt;former Mayor

Transportation
Easter Island is served by Mataveri International Airport, with jet service (currently Boeing 767s) from LAN Airlines and, seasonally, subsidiaries such as LAN Peru.
See also

As a counterpoint to Easter Island, see Anuta, where local people still live in harmony with their environment (achieving sustainable development).




North Sentinel Island
Omphalos
List of islands
List of islands named after calendar entries
List of largest monoliths in the world
Podesta
Rapa Nui language
Rapa Nui mythology


Notes

References












Further reading



Erickson, Jon D. and John M. Gowdy (2000). &quot;Resource Use, Institutions, and Sustainability: A Tale of Two Pacific Island Cultures.&lt;U+201D&gt; Land Economics 76(3): 345&lt;U+2013&gt;354.



in Google Books

Vergano, Dan. &quot;Were rats behind Easter Island mystery?&quot; USA Today (15 November 2009)

External links



Easter Island - The Statues and Rock Art of Rapa Nui &lt;U+2013&gt; Bradshaw Foundation / Dr Georgia Lee
Chile Cultural Society &lt;U+2013&gt; Easter Island
Rapa Nui Digital Media Archive&lt;U+2014&gt;Creative Commons&lt;U+2013&gt;licensed photos, laser scans, panoramas, focused in the area around Rano Raraku and Ahu Te Pito Kura with data from an Autodesk/CyArk research partnership
Mystery of Easter Island &lt;U+2013&gt; PBS Nova program
Description of island and discussion of dating controversies




Category:Archaeological sites in Chile Category:Archaeological sites in Oceania Category:Communes of Chile   Category:Ecoregions of Chile Category:Islands of Oceania Category:Polynesia Category:Provinces of Chile Category:Volcanic islands



↩
↩
↩
&quot;Calculate the Date of Easter Sunday&quot;, Astronomical Society of South Australia. Retrieved 7 February 2013.↩
An English translation of the originally Dutch journal by Jacob Roggeveen, with additional significant information from the log by Cornelis Bouwman, was published in: Andrew Sharp (ed.), The Journal of Jacob Roggeveen (Oxford 1970).↩
↩
 Heyerdahl's view was that the two islands were about the same size, and that &quot;big&quot; and &quot;small&quot; were not physical but historical attributes, &quot;big&quot; indicating the original. In reality, however, Easter Island is more than four times bigger than Rapa Iti. Heyerdahl also stated that there is an island called &quot;Rapa&quot; in Lake Titicaca in South America, but so far there is no map available showing an island of that name in the lake.↩
↩
↩

↩
↩
Collapse: How Societies Choose to Fail or Succeed↩
↩
http://travel.nationalgeographic.com/travel/world-heritage/easter-island/↩
Bo Rothstein (2005). Social traps and the problem of trust. Cambridge University Press. p. 20. ISBN 0-521-84829-6↩
Barbara A. West (2008) Encyclopedia of the Peoples of Asia and Oceania. Infobase Publishing. p. 684. ISBN 0-8160-7109-8↩
↩
Beverley Haun (2008). Inventing 'Easter Island'. University of Toronto Press. p. 8. ISBN 0-8020-9888-6↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
Raymond J. Lewis's review of Rapanui; Tradition and Survival on Easter Island.↩
Pinochet no asiste a la inauguraci&lt;U+00F3&gt;n de la pista de la isla de Pascua↩
Chilean Law 20,193, National Congress of Chile↩
↩
Gerald R. Allen, Two New Species of Frogfishes (Antennaridae) from Easter Island, Pacific Science 24, no.4 (1970), 521.↩
↩
↩
↩
↩


↩
Inst of Petrology Vol 38 Haase, Stoffers &amp; Garbe-Schoneberg 1↩
Inst of Petrology Vol 38 The Petrogenetic Evolution of Lavas from Easter Island and Neighbouring Seamounts, Near-ridge Hotspot Volcanoes in the SE Pacific &lt;U+2013&gt; Haase, Stoffers &amp; Garbe-Schoneberg 15↩
Rapanui: Edmunds and Bryan Photograph Collection. Libweb.hawaii.edu. Retrieved on 6 November 2010.↩
↩
Easter Island Article in Letsgochile.com↩
↩
Andres Meith and Hans-Rudolf Bork, &quot;Humans, Climate, or introduced rats-which is to blame for the woodland destruction on Prehistoric Rapa Nui (Easter Island)?&quot; Journal of Archaeological Science, 37 (2010):417-26.↩
C. Michael Hogan. 2008. Chilean Wine Palm: Jubaea chilensis, GlobalTwitcher.com, ed. N. Stromberg↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩

↩
↩

Finney (1994), Hunter Anderson (1998); P.D. Nunn (1999, 2003); Orliac and Orliac (1998)↩

↩
↩
Pacific islands archaeology↩
↩

↩
↩
Skj&lt;U+00F8&gt;lsvold, Arne &quot;Report 14: The Stone Statues and Quarries of Rano Raraku in Thor Heyerdahl and Edwin N. Ferdon Jr. (eds.) 'Reports of the Norwegian Archaeological Expedition to Easter Island and the East Pacific'&quot;, Volume 1, Archaeology of Easter Island, Monographs of the School of American Research and The Museum of New Mexico, Number 24, Part 1, 1961, pp. 339&lt;U+2013&gt;379. (esp. p. 346 for the description of the general statues and Fig. 91, p. 347, pp. 360&lt;U+2013&gt;362 for the description of the kneeling statues)↩
Van Tilburg, Jo Anne. Easter Island. Archaeology, Ecology and Culture, British Museum Press 1994:134&lt;U+2013&gt;135, fig. 106↩
NOVA Online|Secrets of Easter Island|Paro. Pbs.org. Retrieved on 6 November 2010.↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
Heavy erosion and landslides may have buried them in soil.↩

 However, Alfred Metraux pointed out that the rubble filled Rapanui walls were a fundamentally different design to those of the Inca, as these are trapezoidal in shape as opposed to the perfectly fitted rectangular stones of the inca. See also ↩
↩
Fischer, pp. 31, 63.↩
↩
Wooden gorget (rei miro). British Museum.↩
Brooklyn Museum, &quot;Collections: Arts of the Pacific Islands: Lizard Figure (Moko Miro).&quot; Last modified 2011. Accessed 18 November 2013. [http://www.brooklynmuseum.org/opencollection/objects/63656/Lizard_Figure_Moko_Miro/image/14222/image.]↩
Encyclop&lt;U+00E6&gt;dia Britannica Online, &quot;Moai Figure&quot;, Accessed 16 November 2013. [http://www.britannica.com/EBchecked/topic/386738/moai-figure.]↩
Encyclop&lt;U+00E6&gt;dia Britannica Online, &quot;Moai Figure&quot;, accessed 16 November 2013. [http://www.britannica.com/EBchecked/topic/386738/moai-figure.]↩
Primeros datos del Censo: Hay 37.626 mujeres m&lt;U+00E1&gt;s que hombres en la V Regi&lt;U+00F3&gt;n. Estrellavalpo.cl (11 June 2002). Retrieved on 6 November 2010.↩
↩
 ↩
↩
 ↩


