 The Cancelled expressways in Toronto were a series of expressways planned by Metropolitan Toronto that were cancelled for various reasons. Many of the expressways, intended to spur growth in the suburbs of Toronto, were cancelled due to public opposition of the City of Toronto proper.
History
By the 1940s, urban development extended past the City of Toronto's borders. It was recognized within the planning department of the City that population growth would take place and that the farmlands outside of the City's border would be developed. In 1943, the City of Toronto Planning Board developed a plan for the area within a nine-mile radius of Yonge Street and Queen Street. It included a network of superhighways:

A. Lakeshore Expressway (which was implemented as the Gardiner Expressway), from QEW-427 interchange along the waterfront east to Scarborough eastern border,
B. Spadina Expressway
C. North along Coxwell north to today's Don Valley and 401 interchange,
D. Toronto By-Pass (today's 401)
E. From 427-QEW interchange, along Bloor Street east to meet Don Valley, then east along Gerrard to meet Lakeshore at Victoria Park
An un-named highway which started at the foot of today's Don Valley, then north-west to Eglinton, then west along Eglinton to the vicinity of Pearson airport.

Source: Sewell(2009)1
With the creation of Metropolitan Toronto in 1953, a series of ambitious plans developed to greatly expand the network of municipal expressways inside the Toronto city limits. These expressways would connect the downtown core with the provincial freeways that bordered the city, reducing the need to drive on the city streets. In particular, Highway 401 on the northern border of most developed portions of the city was difficult to get to; the only mid-town routes were on adapted city streets like University Avenue, which were far from ideal. Likewise, Queen Elizabeth Way (QEW) on the western edge of the city had fairly limited access via The Queensway and Lake Shore Boulevard.
Construction begins
Construction of the network started with what was then known as the Lakeshore Expressway, which would connect the QEW from its terminus at the Humber River with the downtown core. The initial western section opened in 1958, continuing eastward as an elevated highway to York Street in the city core in 1962, and further to the Don River by 1964. During construction the Lakeshore was renamed the Gardiner Expressway, after the first chair of Metropolitan Toronto and major supporter of the expressway plans, Fred Gardiner. A second expressway, the Don Valley Parkway (DVP), opened between Bloor Street and Eglinton Avenue in 1961, and continued to develop north and south until it connected to Highway 401 in the north and the Gardiner in the south.
These plans were only the beginning of an even larger network that was first proposed in 1959, and fully developed by 1966 when it became the Official Plan. Of particular importance was the Spadina Expressway, which ran north-south and connected the middle of 401 with the downtown core, ending on Spadina Avenue near the University of Toronto. The 400 Extension, also known as the Christie/Clinton Expressway, extended the existing Highway 400 south and east, eventually connecting to the Gardiner near Fort York just west of the downtown core. The Crosstown Expressway bisected the city into north and south, running roughly along Dupont Street for much of its length, connecting to the 400 Extension in the west and bending southward towards Bloor Street in the east where it connected with the DVP. The Richview Expressway was a shorter at-grade expressway connecting the western end of the Crosstown at the 400 Extension with Highway 27 further west, and eventually connecting to the proposed Highway 403. Finally, the Scarborough Expressway would connect the Gardiner in the downtown core with Highway 401 in the far eastern reaches of the city. The resulting network would provide three east-west expressways, and five north-south ones, dividing the city into a grid.
Construction on portions of all of the planned expressways started in the late 1960s. The provincial portion of southern extension of Highway 400 was completed to Eglinton where it would be continued by the city-built road, and the Gardiner was widened near the Canadian National Exhibition grounds where it would meet the 400 Extension. Interchanges for the Crosstown, Richview and Scarborough Expressways were constructed at their terminating points, and full construction of the Spadina Expressway started at its northern end.
Problems and protests
The construction plans became a point of growing protests in the late 1960s and early 1970s. The route of the Gardiner and DVP had run mostly through industrial areas, parkland or generally unused areas, and had not generated much public concern during early construction. This changed as the Gardiner approached the downtown area, which resulted in the demolishing of long-established neighborhoods. The planned expressways would require the same throughout the city, and with the exception of the northern ends of the roads, generally ran though well-settled areas. In particular, the Spadina Expressway ran through the Forest Hill, The Annex, Harbord Village, Kensington Market and Chinatown neighbourhoods, while the Crosstown would present a below-grade barrier on The Annex's northern border. The Crosstown would run beside Rosedale on its eastern end, displacing a forested ravine.
A new resident to The Annex, Jane Jacobs, had been instrumental in blocking the Lower Manhattan Expressway in New York City before moving to Canada in 1969. According to Jacobs, it was the construction of expressways into major American cities that led to an exodus of the middle class, and the death of once-vibrant downtown cores. With David and Nadine Nowlan they formed the &quot;Stop Spadina And Save Our City&quot; group, which grew to become a major rallying point for anti-expressway feeling in the city. By the late 1960s the Spadina Expressway had become a &quot;hot&quot; topic politically.
To add to the problems, by 1969 construction of the Spadina Expressway had just reached Eglinton Avenue (although paved only to Lawrence Avenue), less than half its planned route, but had already spent almost all of its $79 million budget. Metro Toronto had to return to the Ontario Municipal Board for additional loans to complete the project, which were provided in a 2-to-1 decision. Stop Spadina appealed, and construction was halted pending the outcome. In 1971 Premier John Robarts retired and handed the Premiership to William Davis, who agreed to hear an appeal of the Municipal Board's decision.
Cancellation
On June 3, 1971 Davis rose in the Provincial Legislature and stated:

Davis agreed to continue funding for the construction of the Toronto Transit Commission (TTC) subway line (now part of the Yonge-University-Spadina Line) that was part of the original Expressway plans, and later, in 1972, agreed to complete the unfinished portion of the Expressway between Eglinton and Lawrence. The debate on whether or not to continue the Expressway further south from Eglinton continued throughout the 1970s. Eglinton was not designed to handle the loads imposed by the Expressway and has to be controlled by traffic lights at the intersection, causing southbound traffic to often back up to Lawrence during rush hour.
Aftermath
The cancellation of the Spadina Expressway heralded the end of the expressway plans in Toronto. Work on the other expressways in the system was simply abandoned. The 400 Extension stopped at Eglinton where the province left it, although it was later extended with the at-grade Black Creek Drive to Weston Road. The eastern terminus of the Crosstown at the DVP now exists as the massively oversized Bloor Street interchange, while the western terminus of the Richview forms the likewise oversized interchange between the 401, 427 and Eglinton near the Pearson Airport. Highway 403 was built, but connects to the 401 further west. Both ends of the Scarborough Expressway were built, in the east as a large interchange that quickly turns into a much smaller exchange with Kingston Road, and in the downtown core as a several-kilometer extension of the Gardiner past the DVP to Leslie Street.
Lands acquired for the proposed Scarborough and Richview Expressways remained in municipal government ownership for another twenty years after the shelving of the proposals. Much of the land remains in public ownership today, though future uses have not yet been determined. In 2001 the Gardiner extension was demolished between the DVP and Leslie, and there are plans to remove the connection to the DVP entirely.
Ongoing political debate
In the subsequent decades, the Peel Region and York Region suburbs of Toronto have expanded greatly in population and industrial development. The availability of land for development and pro-development municipal governments has led to extensive residential and industrial development. An extensive highway network has been developed of Highways 403, 407, 410, 427 and 404 within those suburbs. In comparison, the City has not built any new expressways since the cancellation of the Spadina.
As an alternative to road construction, the city and province have made efforts to expand the TTC services within the core and expand GO Transit commuter train service. Although TTC ridership declined in the 1980s and 1990s, it has recently begun to reverse the trend. In 2008, a new record for ridership was set,2 indicating a growing demand for alternatives to private vehicles for personal transportation. Since the expressways reached capacity in the 1970s, commuting has been handled by increased transit, to the point that only 10% of commuters use the Gardiner Expressway to get downtown, according to 2006 figures.
The debate continues to this day about the merits of the canceled expressways. Highway advocates, including some industry and suburban commuters, believe in the necessity of the expressways to meet high demand from suburban growth and automobile traffic between suburbs and the downtown core. Those advocates also believe in the necessity of new expressways to reduce the traffic congestion of the existing expressways. Opposing groups, including residents of the core are opposed to expansion because of the air pollution, noise and health effects associated with expressways. These impact the standard of living in urban areas and hinder urban growth. Transit advocates point to the higher capacity of a transit line compared to an expressway as a better use of government resources. Cycling advocates promote cycling routes as an alternative for commuting and recreation.
Special interest groups have formed to advocate for expressway construction in Toronto. A Scarborough-based citizen group called the Citizens' Transportation Alliance of Greater Toronto advocates for a restart of expressway construction in Toronto. The group proposes the construction of one new expressway to the northwest of Toronto, most likely an upgrade of Black Creek Drive, and one expressway to the east through Scarborough, along a hydro corridor or an upgrade of Kingston Road. The group also supports filling in the 'missing links' of the arterial road grid.3 Based upon the group's proposal, a prominent association of automobile owners, the Canadian Automobile Association, published a plan of expansion within the City borders to address the congestion. This included the building of a new Scarborough Expressway through a route over Lake Ontario, new expressways and arterial roads and the building of the Richview Expressway.
The City of Toronto, along with the Province of Ontario government, is focused instead on transit alternatives. The City aims to reduce the need for highways through improvements and additions to the current transit network, as described in the Transit City plan. In April 2009, the province announced that several initiatives of the Transit City plan, including an east-west Eglinton Light Rail line connecting to the airport would proceed on accelerated construction schedules.
Other plans debated during municipal elections have included the development of new toll highways and/or expansion of current expressways through the conversion to tolls. Toll highways have been seen as political poison, however, and no politician has made them a part of any election campaign.
Crosstown Expressway
The Crosstown Expressway was a planned expressway through central Toronto. Although it was consistently opposed by the City of Toronto Council, it remained in the Metro Toronto plan until it was cancelled in the aftermath of the Spadina Expressway cancellation.
Route
As part of the 1959 plan of Metropolitan Toronto, the Expressway would have connected the Highway 400 extension, along an east-west route in the vicinity of Christie Street and Dupont Street, east to the Don Valley Parkway. The 400 would have continued south to the Gardiner Expressway. North of Spadina Road, the Spadina Expressway would have connected via an interchange. The expressway would continue east along a CN/CP railway corridor north of Dupont Street to Mount Pleasant Road. East of Mount Pleasant Road, the expressway would have cut through the neighbourhood of Rosedale to connect with the Don Valley Parkway. This section would have been built through ravine parklands.
Interchange with Don Valley Parkway

Part of Don Valley Parkway / Bloor off-ramp as it crosses Bayview Avenue in the Don Valley. Looking north along Bayview.

While land was obtained, the expressway was not built, although a short connecting road built to connect the Don Valley Parkway to the Bayview Avenue Extension and Bloor Street would have been integrated into the project. When the first section of the Don Valley was opened from Bloor Street to Eglinton Avenue, the roadway was the southern terminus, and is still used as an on/off ramp for the Parkway. Sections of the Parkway south of the road, and north of Eglinton Avenue were opened later. The unnamed roadway is a four-lane arterial road with interchanges at either end. The interchange with the Don Valley is named the 'Chester Hill' interchange.4
East Metro Freeway
The East Metro Freeway was a proposed north-south expressway to begin at Highway 401 and Morningside Avenue and roughly follow the edge of the Rouge River valley to Highway 407 which itself was under planning at that time. In phase 2,beyond the 407, the proposed route was between the Ninth Line and the York-Durham Line in Markham, leading to Stouffville. It was a last priority for the province and construction was not planned to have begun until the Scarborough Expressway was completed. It was not an extension of the Scarborough Expressway as the Scarborough's western terminus would have been 2 km west of East Metro's southern terminus.
After the cancellation of the Spadina Expressway, the Scarborough Expressway was put on hold and went into review. Toronto, Metro Toronto, and Ontario had 4 choices left. Choices 2,3, and 4 included the East Metro Freeway. Choice 2 was selected. This Choice didn't have the Scarborough Expressway. With the Scarborough gone, the East Metro route was less necessary. It also encountered serious opposition from Rouge River naturalist groups. The proposal was officially dropped from planning documents on June 1, 1994.
Richview Expressway
 The Richview Expressway was only partially completed due to concerns of under-utilization and opposition from local residents. Even though Richview Expressway was never built, it did result in widening of a section of Eglinton Avenue from Black Creek Drive to Highway 427.
The Richview Expressway has also been known as the Hamilton Expressway, since the original routing for Highway 403 (a main route for Torontonians to travel to Hamilton) was planned to terminate at present site of the interchange between Highway 401 and Highway 427. If the original routing of Highway 403 had been carried out, then Metro's Richview Expressway would have been considered a municipal extension of Highway 403.
Interchanges
Although the expressway was never completed, the plans had on/off ramps for:
From west to east:


Street


Description



Highway 427

Interchange ramps


Eglinton Avenue West

Partial ramps


Kipling Avenue

Ramps not completed - full cloverleaf planned in 1960s cancelled in 1970s plan


Islington Avenue

Ramps not completed - full cloverleaf planned in 1960s cancelled in 1970s plan


Royal York Road

Ramps not completed - full cloverleaf planned in 1960s cancelled in 1970s plan


Scarlett Road

Ramps not completed - partial cloverleaf planned in 1960s cancelled in 1970s plan


Jane Street

Ramps not completed - ramps planned in 1960s cancelled in 1970s plan


Mount Dennis

Ramps not completed - full cloverleafs in 1960s and 1970s plans


Highway 400 southern extension

Ramps not completed - full cloverleafs in 1960s and 1970s plans



Scarborough Expressway
The Scarborough Expressway (Gardiner Expressway Eastern Extension) was intended to connect the Gardiner Expressway to Highway 401 at the eastern boundary of Toronto, and one segment was built before public opposition stopped the project.
From a road-transportation standpoint, it remains a major &quot;missing link&quot; in the city's expressway system, as traffic entering Toronto from the east would have travelled directly downtown, as well as serving the south-east area of Toronto. Instead, that traffic is combined with traffic entering from the north along the Don Valley Parkway, where traffic volume significantly exceeds capacity on a daily basis. This has spurred various road advocates to propose new routes to keep the idea alive.
History
 This road was first conceived as part of planning studies in the 1940s, and detailed planning for the new freeway began in 1967. Construction was expected to begin after completion of the Spadina Expressway. Early plans had the road travelling beside the CN route in the southern parts of the then Borough of Scarborough, but later plans were to have the highway continue as an eastern extension of the Gardiner Expressway along the shores of Lake Ontario, connecting with Highway 401 by incorporating the existing Highway 2A, a short stub freeway segment that was part of the original 401 alignment.
The original 1967 proposal would have seen 1,200 homes demolished for the expressway. After fierce opposition to this plan, the City redesigned the route in 1973. It was moved entirely to within the Lakeshore East CN/GO railway corridor, commencing from the Don Valley Parkway/Gardiner interchange and would be depressed in a deep ditch. The number of homes to be demolished was reduced to 706. However, this did not pacify east Toronto residents who continued to fight the plan. The City shelved the expressway in 1974 to prevent the possibility of the Province stepping in and canceling it, as they had done with the Spadina Expressway in 1971.
Land and property along the road was bought by Metro Toronto and some infrastructure was built. However, Metro faced opposition from the City of Toronto, which caused the road to be severed from the Gardiner Expressway. The fiercest opposition came from eastern Toronto, so this section was deleted. Only a route within Scarborough remained proposed. However, it would have come to an abrupt end at Victoria Park Avenue at the Toronto/Scarborough boundary, potentially flooding east end neighbourhoods with traffic. Local residents continued to fight the plan and appeared before the Ontario Municipal Board to oppose Metro every time it tried to purchase more land for the route. Metro Toronto and Scarborough continued to push for the expressway, now known as the Scarborough Transportation Corridor. Along with this corridor, parts of Eglinton Avenue East were considered as a potential arterial highway to relieve Highway 401, especially after the extension of the Don Valley Parkway (and later Highway 404) caused increased traffic flow.
Demise
Up to the early 1990s, Metro and Scarborough both continued to keep the Scarborough Expressway plan alive, but by 1994 the focus on expressways was no longer a planning priority. By 1996, Metro began to plan for the demolition the eastern end of the Gardiner Expressway, thus effectively ending the Scarborough Expressway/Scarborough Transportation Corridor.
Much of the land acquired for the expressway route across Scarborough remains vacant, however the City of Toronto is carrying out studies on what to do with the lands. Ideas include local streets, housing projects and public parkland. Bridges along the CN/GO corridor were generally built with room to place two-lanes of road on either side of the railway, these are empty today and allow for future rail upgrades.
In the early 2000s, much of the land east of Manse Road in Scarborough was sold by the City of Toronto for other purposes. The parcel between Kingston Road and Lawrence Avenue was developed into homes, and a police station was constructed on a parcel on the south side of Lawrence Avenue.
Spadina Expressway

The Spadina Expressway was a proposed freeway to run from north of Highway 401 into the downtown of Toronto via the Cedarvale and Nordheimer Ravines and Spadina Road, it was only partially built before being cancelled in 1971 by the Ontario government due to public opposition. It was proposed in the mid-1960s as part of a network of freeways for Metropolitan Toronto. The completed section is known today as Allen Road.
References

External links

Crosstown Expressway
Bayview-Bloor interchange, from Google Maps


Category:Toronto highways Category:Streets in Toronto Category:Cancelled highway projects in Canada



Sewell(2009), pp. 32-33↩
Rob Robert, &quot;More TTC riders, more TTC buses&quot;, November 20, 2008↩
↩
↩


