
Charles J. Russhon (March 23 1911 - June 26 1982 ) was an American photographer and Lieutenant in the United States Air Force who later became noted for his role as a technical adviser and liaison officer on the Sean Connery and Roger Moore James Bond films of the 1960s and 1970s.
He served as a photographer in World War II and was the first American to photograph Hiroshima after the atomic bomb attack 1 . He served in the China-Burma-India Theater of WWII and attained the rank of lieutenant colonel in the United States Army Air Force.
After the war, Russhon became interested in motion pictures and served as a technical adviser to filmmakers. He used his former position in the airforce and expertise most notably on the James Bond films enabling the producer to gain access to previously off boundary locations and equipment. In 1963 he negotiated the use of land in Istanbul from the Turkish authorities during the making of From Russia With Love  and gained the rights to use Fort Knox for Goldfinger in 1964 using his position in the Army Air Force to allow special use in film. The producers acknowledge his help by a sign in the film at Ft Knox that reads &quot;Welcome Gen. Russhon&quot;.
He was also an adviser on the 1965 Bond film Thunderball and was able to supply the experimental rocket fuel used to destroy the Disco Volante (ship) in the film. Russhon using his position was also able to gain access to the US Navy's still experimental Skyhook rescue system which was used to lift actors Sean Connery and Claudine Auger from the water at the end of the film.2. Russhon appears in Air Force uniform in the film.
Russhon later worked on You Only Live Twice and Live and Let Die in 1973.
Personal life
Russhon was a lifelong close friend of the renowned cartoonist Milton Caniff and provided Caniff with the inspiration behind his ice cream loving character Charlie Vanilla in the comic strip Steve Canyon., like Russhon sharing a fondness for the dessert. 3
He died at his Manhattan home on Saturday June 26 1982 aged 71 and was survived by his wife Claire, and a son, Christian, both of New York City.
References

External links







Category:American photographers Category:People from New York City Category:1911 births Category:1982 deaths



↩
Production notes for Thunderball — MI6.co.uk↩
↩


