
Little Llangothlin Nature Reserve is a wetland nature reserve lying about 10 km north-east of the rural locality of Llangothlin, and some 20 km north-east of Guyra, on the Northern Tablelands of the New England region of New South Wales, Australia. It contains the 120 ha Little Llangothlin Lagoon, part of the smaller Billy Bung Lagoon, and was established in 1979 under the NSW National Parks and Wildlife Act 1974. In 1996 the 258 ha reserve was designated a wetland of international importance under the Ramsar Convention. It, with the adjacent area of Bagot Road, is also listed on Australia&lt;U+2019&gt;s Register of the National Estate.1
The Little Llangothlin Nature Reserve is an important site because it has some of the last high altitude freshwater lagoons on basalt soil on the New England Tableland of New South Wales. The reserve is situated in an area that has lost most of its vegetation to create arable land. It thus serves as a vital refuge for numerous species of birds, mammals, amphibians and reptiles.2
Description
The reserve lies on Tertiary basalt soils on the New England Plateau at an altitude of 1360 m above sea level, and is surrounded by pastoral farmland. It protects a still largely natural example of a high altitude lake, most of which have been cleared or severely modified in the region. The lagoon fills a natural depression in the tableland landscape; a former agricultural drainage ditch has been filled in to restore it&lt;U+2019&gt;s original water depth of about 2 m when full. The vegetation includes sedgeland, herbland and grassy woodland. Trees include New England peppermints, snowgums and silver wattles. The rare Hairy Anchor Plant and Austral Toadflax are found there. The wetlands of the reserve form an important drought refuge for many kinds of waterbirds as well as supporting several species of frogs and reptiles.3 A 4.8 km walking track encircles the lagoon.
References


Category:Wetlands of Australia Category:Ramsar sites in Australia Category:Northern Tablelands Category:Nature reserves in New South Wales Category:Lakes of New South Wales Category:Register of the National Estate Category:1979 establishments in Australia



↩
↩



