
Rhodes House in Oxford, designed by Sir Herbert Baker.

The Rhodes Scholarship named after Cecil Rhodes is an international award for study at the University of Oxford and was the first large-scale programme of international scholarships.1 Rhodes Scholars may study any full-time postgraduate course offered by the University2 &lt;U+2013&gt; whether a taught Master&lt;U+2019&gt;s programme, a research degree, or a second undergraduate degree (senior status).
The Scholarship is for two years in the first instance, though may be held for one year only; applications for a third year are considered during the course of the 2nd year.
University and College fees are paid by the Rhodes Trust. In addition, Scholars receive a monthly maintenance stipend to cover accommodation and living expenses. Although all scholars become affiliated with a residential college while at Oxford, they also enjoy access to Rhodes House, an early 20th century mansion with numerous public rooms, gardens, a library, study areas, and other facilities.
The scholarships are administered and awarded by the Rhodes Trust which was established in 1902 under the terms and conditions of the will of Cecil John Rhodes, and funded by his estate. Scholarships have been awarded to applicants annually since 1904 on the basis of academic achievement and strength of character. There have been more than 7,000 Rhodes Scholars since the inception of the Trust. More than 4,000 are still living.3 In 1925, the Commonwealth Fund Fellowships (later renamed the Harkness Fellowships) were established to reciprocate the Rhodes Scholarships by enabling British graduates to study in the United States.4
Standards
Rhodes' legacy specified four standards by which applicants were to be judged:

literary and scholastic attainments;
energy to use one's talents to the full, as exemplified by fondness for and success in sports;
truth, courage, devotion to duty, sympathy for and protection of the weak, kindliness, unselfishness and fellowship;
moral force of character and instincts to lead, and to take an interest in one's fellow beings.

This legacy originally provided for scholarships for the British colonies, the United States, and Germany. These three were chosen so that &quot;an understanding between the three great powers will render war impossible.&quot;
Rhodes, who attended Oxford University, chose his alma mater as the site of his great experiment because he believed its residential colleges provided the ideal environment for intellectual contemplation and personal development.
Rhodes' original aim with the Scholarship, and subsequent changes
There has been some controversy over the original aim of the scholarships, as it is clear from Rhodes' writings that he held views, which at that time had some currency, about the superiority of the Anglo race, and it has been postulated that his intention was to use the scholarships to educate future foreign leaders in Britain so that they could help spread British influence when they returned to their home countries.
The Secretary of the Rhodes Trust 1925-1939 was Philip Kerr, 11th Marquess of Lothian who was a progressive imperialist, and an ex-member of Milner's Kindergarten.[relevance?]
An early change was the elimination of the scholarships for Germany during World Wars I and II. No German scholars were chosen from 1914 to 1932,5 nor from 1939 to 1970. Also, between the wars, for political and propaganda reasons Erich Vermehren was prevented by the German government from taking up a Rhodes Scholarship.
Rhodes' bequest was whittled down considerably in the first decades after his death, as various scholarship trustees were forced to pay taxes upon their own deaths. A change occurred in 1929, when an Act of Parliament established a fund separate from the original proceeds of Rhodes's will. This made it possible to expand the number of scholarships. For example, between 1993 and 1995, scholarships were extended to other countries in the European Community.
Because the Sex Discrimination Act 1975 in the United Kingdom did not affect wills, it took another Act of Parliament to change the Rhodes' will to extend selection criteria in 1977 to include women.
For at least its first 75 years, scholars usually studied for a Bachelor of Arts degree. While that remains an option, more recent scholars usually study for an advanced degree.
Allocations
There were originally 52 scholarships. During the ensuing 100 years, the Trustees added at one time or another approximately another 40 scholarships, though not all have continued. Some of these extended the scheme to Commonwealth countries not mentioned in the Will.6 A more detailed allocation by region by year can be found at Rhodes Scholarship Allocations. Very brief summaries of some of the terms and conditions can be found on the Trust's web site.78 Complete details can be obtained from the nominating countries.9
Currently, scholars are selected from citizens of 14 specified geographic constituencies,1011 namely: Australia; Bermuda; Canada; Germany; Hong Kong; India; Jamaica &amp; Commonwealth Caribbean; Kenya; New Zealand; Pakistan; Southern Africa (South Africa and neighbours Botswana, Lesotho, Malawi, Namibia and Swaziland); USA; Zambia; and Zimbabwe.
From 2006, 11 scholarships were suspended for a period of 5 years. The scholarships for Hong Kong were abolished in July 1997 following its withdrawal from the Commonwealth (due to the transfer of sovereignty from the United Kingdom to the People's Republic of China). However, with the benefaction from the Lee Hysan Foundation (described by the Rhodes Trust as &quot;substantial and generous&quot;), the Rhodes Scholarships for Hong Kong were reintroduced in late 2006.12



&quot;Geographic
constituency&quot;


2006
allocation


1902
allocation




Australia13


9


6




Bermuda14


1


1




Canada


11


2




&amp; Newfoundland


1


1




Germany15


2


-




Hong Kong


-


-




India16


6


-




Jamaica17


1


1




&amp; CommonwealthCaribbean


1


-




Kenya


2


-




New Zealand18


3


1




Pakistan


1


-




Southern Africa19


10


5




USA20


32


32




Zambia


1






Zimbabwe


2






(formerly Rhodesia)




3




Total


83


52



Notable Rhodes Scholarship recipients
A table of Notable Rhodes Scholarship recipients can be found at Notable Rhodes Scholars.


See also: Rhodes scholars category


Centenary degrees
In recognition of the centenary of the foundation of the Rhodes Trust in 2003, four scholars were awarded honorary degrees by the University of Oxford:

John Brademas (Indiana &amp; Brasenose 1950), President of New York University, U.S. Congressman (Indiana), 1959-1981
Robert J. L. (Bob) Hawke (Western Australia &amp; University 1953), Prime Minister of Australia, 1983-1991
Rex Nettleford (Jamaica &amp; Oriel 1957), Vice-Chancellor of the University of the West Indies, author, dance director
David R. Woods (Rhodes &amp; University 1963), Vice-Chancellor of Rhodes University

Current trustees
The Trust21 is governed by a Board of Trustees:

William Waldegrave, Baron Waldegrave of North Hill (Chairman)
Professor Sir John Bell (Alberta &amp; Magdalen 1975)
Robin Butler, Baron Butler of Brockwell
Rod Eddington (Western Australia &amp; Lincoln 1974)
Professor Elizabeth Fallaize
Robert Fellowes, Baron Fellowes
Rosalind Hedley-Miller22
John Kerr, Baron Kerr of Kinlochard
Julian Thompson
Thomas W. Seaman
Professor John Vickers

The business of the Trust is administered by the Warden of Rhodes House and Secretary to the Trust, Colin Lucas.
Former trustees

Albert Grey, 4th Earl Grey
Douglas Hogg, 1st Viscount Hailsham
Rudyard Kipling

References and notes
In the Oxford University Calendar,23 the Greek letter rho (ρ) against a name indicates that the person is a former Rhodes Scholar. This symbol should precede the name.24

Further reading

R.I. Rotberg, The Founder: Cecil Rhodes and the Pursuit of Power (Oxford University Press, New York, 1988)
Anthony Kenny (ed.), The History of the Rhodes Trust (Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2001)


External links

The Rhodes Trust
History of Rhodes Trust and Rhodes Scholarship
Updates on Rhodes Alumni
Scholarship and application information page
The Australian Rhodes Scholarship
Bermuda Selection Committee
The Canadian Association of Rhodes Scholars
The Rhodes Trust in Germany
Indian Rhodes Scholarships
Committee for Jamaica and the Commonwealth Caribbean
New Zealand Vice-Chancellors' Committee page on Rhodes Scholarships
New Zealand Rhodes Scholars, listed for 1903 to 1964
The Mandela Rhodes Foundation in South Africa
Southern African Rhodes Scholarships
Rhodes University &lt;U+2014&gt; South Africa
The Rhodes Trust, USA
Association of American Rhodes Scholars
United States Naval Academy Rhodes Scholars
The first in-depth study of Rhodes women

de:Rhodes-Stipendium fr:Bourse Rhodes he:&lt;U+05DE&gt;&lt;U+05DC&gt;&lt;U+05D2&gt;&lt;U+05EA&gt; &lt;U+05E8&gt;&lt;U+05D5&gt;&lt;U+05D3&gt;&lt;U+05D6&gt; ja:&lt;U+30ED&gt;&lt;U+30FC&gt;&lt;U+30BA&gt;&lt;U+5968&gt;&lt;U+5B66&gt;&lt;U+5236&gt;&lt;U+5EA6&gt; fi:Rhodes-stipendi zh:&lt;U+7F57&gt;&lt;U+5179&gt;&lt;U+5956&gt;&lt;U+5B66&gt;&lt;U+91D1&gt;
Category:Awards established in 1902 Category:Education finance Category:Financial aid Category:Scholarships in the United Kingdom   Category:University of Oxford



The American Rhodes Scholarships: A Review of the First Forty Years, Review author[s]: Harvie Branscomb, The American Historical Review &lt;U+00A9&gt; 1947 American Historical Association↩
Periodically the Rhodes Trustees include or exclude the MBA from the courses offered.↩
Brief history of the Rhodes Trust↩
History of the Harkness Fellowships↩
Adam von Trott zu Solz was Germany's Rhodes Scholar in 1931. He was executed by the Nazis in 1944.↩

Rhodes Scholarship FAQ↩
Information about the Scholarships↩
Country Websites and Information↩
Rhodes Scholarship constituencies↩
Countries from which Rhodes Scholars are selected↩
The Rhodes Scholarship for Hong Kong - Memorandum for 2007↩
The Rhodes Scholarships in Australia↩
The Rhodes Scholarships in Bermuda↩
The Rhodes Scholarships in Germany↩
The Rhodes Scholarships in India↩
The Rhodes Scholarships for Jamaica &amp; the Commonwealth Caribbean↩
The Rhodes Scholarships in New Zealand↩
The Rhodes Scholarships in South Africa↩
The Rhodes Trust, USA↩
Rhodes Trust Board of Trustees↩
Top 100 Women in European Finance 2007 Financial News Online, 29 Oct 2007↩
Oxford University Calendar↩
Notes on style, Oxford University Calendar, 7 April 2008, retrieved 2008-10-10.↩


