
Decibel Festival is an annual music and digital arts festival started in 2004 in Seattle by Sean Horton. Decibel is dedicated to live electronic music performance, visual art and new media. The core of the festival comprises concerts, performances, commissioned work, film screenings and exhibitions. The programing is presented in a variety of locations throughout Seattle, centered around the Capitol Hill neighborhood and Downtown. In addition to these performance programs, Decibel also includes a professional section featuring panels, lectures and workshops. These serve as a meeting ground for leading-edge artists, labels and music gear manufacturers.
In fall 2011, Decibel celebrated its largest edition to date, pulling in over 23,000 attendees. The 2011 edition sold both record numbers of festival passes (up 18% from 2010) and individual showcase tickets (up 45% from 2010).
Since its inception, Decibel has hosted over 750 acts ranging from underground dance and experimental electronic music to transmedial art. Past highlights include: Amon Tobin ISAM LIVE, Moby, Autechre, Deadmau5, Flying Lotus, Justice, Richie Hawtin, Trentemoller, Diplo, Geographer, Boys Noize, Green Velvet, Modeselektor, Gui Boratto, Carl Craig, Simian Mobile Disco, Ladytron, Robin Guthrie, DJ Krush, Four Tet, James Blake, Bonobo, fennesz, Apparat, The Field, Isolee, Moderat, Meat Beat Manifesto, Switch, Monolake, Scuba, Star Slinger, Derrick May, Mt Eden, Biosphere, Gold Panda, Cobblestone Jazz, John Tejada, Speedy J, Michael Mayer, Daedelus, Bruno Pronsato, Stars of the Lid, ill-esha, Baths, Alexi Delano, Starkey, Matthew Dear, TOKiMONSTA, Kevin Saunderson, AraabMUZIK, Nortec Collective, KiloWatts Tycho, Murcof, Joker, The Glitch Mob, Ramadanman, Wighnomy Brothers, Breakage, Martin Buttrich, Mary Anne Hobbs, Thomas Fehlmann, Robert Hood, Wolf + Lamb, Caspa, Mad Professor, Theo Parrish, Zomby, Ellen Allien, Mount Kimbie, Atom&lt;U+2122&gt;, Ben Frost, The Gaslamp Killer, Addison Groove, Dan Bell, Alter Ego, 12th Planet, Soul Clap, Mala, Tiger &amp; Woods, dOP, School of Seven Bells, 3 Channels, Tim Hecker, Claude VonStroke, Funkst&lt;U+00F6&gt;rung, Eluvium, Mountains, Telefon Tel Aviv, Dinky, Catz 'n Dogz, Max Cooper, Frank Bretschneider, Pepe Bradock, Subtle, Machinedrum, Sascha Funke, Matmos, Styrofoam, Lusine, The Sight Below, Akufen, Quantic, Move D, Spacetime Continuum, Vladislav Delay, Girl Unit, Tim Exile, The Album Leaf, Shackleton, Itak Tek, Matias Aguayo, Egyptrixx, FaltyDL, Voodeux, VibeSquad, Bok Bok, Jeff Samuel, The Dead Texan, Smash TV, Marcus Nikolai, Dabrye, Smash TV, Tipper, Jacob London, T.Raumschmiere, Scott Pagano, Harold Budd, Frivolous, Loscil, Robert Babicz, Christopher Willits, Strategy, Mochipet, Kangding Ray and Deadbeat.
Decibel Festival is a member of ICAS (International Cities of Advanced Sound).
External links

Decibel Festival
Decibel Facebook Page
Decibel Twitter Page
Decibel YouTube Page

Category:Music festivals in the United States Category:Electronic music festivals Category:Recurring events established in 2004 Category:Music of Seattle, Washington Category:Festivals in Seattle, Washington
