

The Battle of Lucas Bend took place on January 11, 1862 during the American Civil War. In the network of the Mississippi and the Ohio rivers, the Union river gunboats sought to infiltrate and attack the Confederate positions in Tennessee under Admiral Andrew Hull Foote and General Ulysses S. Grant. On the day of the battle, the Union ironclads Essex and the St Louis, transporting troops down the Tennessee river, engaged the Confederate timberclad warships General Polk, Ivy and Jackson towing the gun platform New Orleans. The Essex, under Commander Porter, and the St Louis forced the Confederate ships to fall back after an hour of skirmishing during which the Union commander was wounded. They retreated to the safety of a nearby Confederate battery at Columbus, where the Union vessels could not follow.
The battle marked one of the first occasions where timberclad warships were convincingly outclassed by the newer ironclad warships, and it would be one of the last naval engagements to see timberclad warships perform a major role.1
The battle
Prelude
 The USS Essex had been constructed in 1856. It was a 1000-ton river gunboat, converted from its original role as a timberclad ferry named New Era. It was armed with one 32-pounder cannon, three 11-inch Dahlgren smooth bores, one 10-inch Dahlgren smoothbore and a 12-pounder howitzer.2 The USS St Louis was a City class ironclad built in 1861 at Carondelet, Missouri. She was armed with three 8-inch smoothboes, four 42-pounder rifles, six 32-pounder rifles and one 12-pounder rifle at the time of her service at Lucas Bend.3 Both ships were sent to Cairo, Illinois early in the Civil War as part of troop transports moving the army into Tennessee.4 Illinois, a Union state which contributed 250,000 men to the Union Army, a figure surpassed by only New York, Pennsylvania, and Ohio, was a key theatre.5 Cairo, at the confluence between the Mississippi and Ohio rivers, was a key supply point and headquarters for Admiral Andrew Hull Foote and General Ulysses S. Grant. It was defended by Fort Defiance.6 The complex river network provided routes for the Union gunboats into the heart of the Confederate's forces, however often the water levels &lt;U+2013&gt; particularly in the Tennessee river &lt;U+2013&gt; were not sufficient for gunboats to pass.7
The vessels arrived in October 1861, venturing up the Cumberland river on October 30. The Essex underwent her final conversion to an ironclad warship in nearby dockyards.8 Over several weeks between December and January, the Union ships had regularly sailed towards the Confederates in both the Mississippi, Ohio and Tennessee Rivers in order to provoke an engagement, to be frustrated by blank-cartridge shots from the latter's cannons which prompted the Union commander to telegram his opposing number to issue a challenge.9 On the evening of January 10, the Essex and the St Louis moved off from their landings in convoy, escorting troop transports carrying Brigadier General John Alexander McClernand's brigade. Their path was blocked for part of the night by a steamer which had run aground north of Cairo, and by Porter moving off-route to investigate to suspicious, but later revealed to be legitimate, boats moored on the riverside.10
Sighting an engagement
 Having sighted the Confederate vessels early in the morning of January 11 in the Tennessee tributary,11 the Essex{{'}}s commander Porter beat to quarters at 10:00 that morning, and sailed under the cover of fog towards the enemy ships and engaged. The enemy consisted of three vessels, the General Polk, Ivy and Jackson &lt;U+2013&gt; vessels that Porter was aware of from a previous engagement in December &lt;U+2013&gt; as well as several smaller boats pulling the New Orleans, a floating battery. Commanding officers in nearby Cairo dispatched the Tyler, carrying Foote, to assist.12 Until around 11:00 hours,13 the two ships fought a &quot;running battle&quot; that was &quot;brisk on both sides&quot; according to Porter.14 The Essex was hit, causing severe damage to the boiler as well as killing 11 crew, and wounded 23 others included Porter.15
At Columbus, there was a Confederate battalion, to which the Confederate ships fell back, forcing the Union vessels to call off their pursuit. Porter and his men were under standing orders not to engage the Confederate guns, though Porter had himself long desired a decisive victory since he assumed command of the New Era. The troops at the battery, having heard the battle, were under fear of immediate land attack by Union troops.16
Foote, in the Tyler, chose not to proceed to Porter's location, and was instead diverted by McClernand, who had captured a prisoner. Porter instead loitered around the Confederate positions, and spotted a pair of buoys in the water. Following a musket shot which sunk one of them, the other was hauled aboard and examined. Porter concluded that they either marked locations of Confederate submarine batteries or indicated a safe pathway through enemy minefields. It was sent for later examination onshore. 17
Aftermath

After having reluctantly given up the chase, the Essex and the St Louis returned to Cairo to replenish and begin ammunition runs, and were relieved by two other vessels which took up guarding Fort Holt.18 In the days following, Porter used a buoy to float towards the Confederate positions a challenge: &quot;Hollins: Why don't you accursed, cowardly rebels bring out your gunboats and fight us. Porter.&quot; Confederate Captain Miller sent his reply in the same medium: &quot;Sir: The ironclad steamer Grampus will meet the Essex at any point and time your Honor may appoint and show you that the power is in our hands. An early reply will be agreeable.&quot; The ships would meet in the coming weeks, however the Confederate vessels proved speedier than the Union ironclads.19 Porter's later account of the engagement was syndicated in the New York Times, where it was well received for their &quot;lucid and graphic manner&quot;.20
The inferiority of the timberclad vessels to the ironclad warships was ever more apparent following the battle, and the Lucas Bend engagement would be among the last engagements of the Civil War to see timberland vessels fulfil anything more than a supporting role for either side.21 The Essex and St Louis would go on to join Admiral Foote's squadron to capture Fort Henry on February 6.22 
Notes

References
Website

Illinois in the Civil War. Illinois Infantry, Cavalry, and Artillery Units


Civil War Warship Types
Federal Warships in Tennessee

Printed








Category:Naval battles of the American Civil War Category:Inconclusive battles of the American Civil War Category:Battles of the Trans-Mississippi Theater of the American Civil War Category:1862 in the United States Category:Maritime incidents in 1862



↩
↩
↩

Illinois in the Civil War. Illinois Infantry, Cavalry, and Artillery Units. Retrieved November 26, 2006.↩
↩






↩






↩




