
The Westgate is a medieval gatehouse in Canterbury, Kent, England. This 60-foot-high western gate of the city wall is the largest surviving city gate in England. Built of Kentish ragstone around 1379, it is still well-preserved and is one of the city's most distinctive landmarks: the last survivor of Canterbury's seven medieval gates. The road still passes between its drum towers, and there is just enough room for a double-decker bus to pass beneath. This scheduled monument and Grade I listed building houses the hundred-year-old West Gate Towers Museum, which is open to the public during limited hours on Saturdays and by special arrangement for groups on weekdays. Access to the museum and roof is via spiral staircases only.
Gateway building
Building history
  Canterbury was walled by the Romans around 300 AD. This has been consistently the most important of the city's gates as it is the London Road entrance and the main entrance from most of Kent. The present towers are a medieval replacement of the Roman west gate, rebuilt around 1380. There was a gate here at the time of the Norman conquest, which is thought to have been Roman. From late Anglo-Saxon times it had the Church of the Holy Cross on top, but both church and gate were dismantled in 1379, and the gate was rebuilt by Archbishop Simon Sudbury before he died in the Peasants' Revolt of 1381.123 It has been suggested that it was built primarily as an entrance for pilgrims visiting the shrine of St Thomas Becket at the cathedral.4 However the rebuild as a defensive status symbol was paid for partly by Sudbury and partly by taxation for military protection against expected raids by the French.5 It has been suggested that the spiral staircases were built to the disadvantage of defenders going downstairs who would have had to to fight invaders climbing up to their right: difficult with a one-handed sword in the right hand. However, slashing with a double-handed sword or pikestaff might have been easier.6
 It is expensively faced in coursed ashlar of Kentish ragstone. It has battered plinths to the drum towers, battlements, machicolations and eighteen gunloops: a high number for a gateway, and among the earliest gunholes in Britain. The gunloops would have been added by the beginning of the fifteenth century. It had a drawbridge over the Stour, a portcullis and wooden doors.7
The gateway has three floors. The ground floor was designed so that the gateway and vaulted passage had entrances to the towers on each side. Each tower had a ground-floor room with fireplace and four gunloops. The north tower's ground-floor room had a spiral staircase to upper floors. The first floor contains a large room with fireplace and, originally, the portcullis mechanism over the vaulted entranceway. This room had doors to the upper room of each tower, each with fireplace and three gunloops, and a northern door to a spiral staircase leading to the roof. Repairs were carried out due to an invasion scare during the 1470s and 1480s. In 1491 or 1492 a large, two-light, transomed, perpendicular east window was added to the large first-floor room, with a view towards the cathedral and along St Peter's Street. The roof over the large first-floor central room has a battlemented parapet walk, originally with access to the tops of both towers and machicolations, as well as to the two low chambers, each with two gunports, in the tops of both towers. This part of the tower was less well-built than the lower storeys, either due to haste during the Peasants' Revolt or because it was built later. In 1793&lt;U+2212&gt;1794 the hall over the gate was split into three and the present square lantern added to the roof, along with the wooden doors and cell linings which are visible today; the cost was &lt;U+00A3&gt;400.8
 The city walls joined the gateway at the back of the drum towers, but this part of the wall was removed in the nineteenth century. Following this, in 1823&lt;U+2212&gt;1829, a jailer's house was built on the north side, and this became a police station and is now a music school. The disused iron bridge which connects the Westgate with the music school dates from this time. Contemporary with this work was the building of St Peter's Place on the south side of the Westgate, along with passages around the Westgte and a new road across the Stour, to cope with increased traffic, which has been damaging the arch of the building for one hundred and fifty years.9
At the end of the 19th century the Westgate was a temporary repository for the city archives until the museum was opened in 1908. It is the largest surviving city gate in England.10111213
Social history
  Canterbury's mayor and corporation were grateful to this martyr to the Revolt who had built them an additional attraction for pilgrims, and they would pray at his tomb or under the Westgate. The head of the rebellious Bluebeard the Hermit was displayed on Westgate in 1450 after he was caught by local people and sent to Henry VI. It is thought that Geoffrey Chaucer may have undertaken a pilgrimage and passed through the gate. In 1648 after the Christmas Day riot, Parliamentarians burnt down all the wooden doors of the city's gates. They were all replaced in 1660, but these replacements were removed at the end of the eighteenth century. They were similar to the surviving wooden Christ Church gates at the cathedral. Royalty have entered the city through the gate, including George VI in 1948.1415
In 1453 Henry VI permitted the Mayor and Commonality to keep a jail at the Westgate, so the building was Canterbury's prison from the 15th to the 19th century, while Canterbury Castle was the county jail. After repairs to the Westgate and jail in 1667, a pound was built on the north side; this is now gone, but Pound Lane remains. The guard rooms, heavily wood-lined in the eighteenth century, became cells for both debtors and criminals, and the room over the arch became the condemned cell with the portcullis now laid on top. Until 1775 there was a grated cage in the prison gateway, where certain prisoners were allowed to beg for alms and speak with passers by. Capital punishment was normally the gallows, plus the stake at Wincheap for religious martyrs in the time of Queen Mary.1617
Listing details
It is a Grade I listed building, HER number TR15NW155 at grid reference TR14595808. It is listed as a Roman site 43&lt;U+2212&gt;409 AD; the site of the medieval Church of the Holy Cross 1066&lt;U+2212&gt;1539 AD; the medieval gate built around 1400 AD. Only the gateway, currently in use as a museum, is standing.18
Museum
  
Management
The curator is Ken Reedie, who has been curator of the Canterbury museums since the early 1970s. Krystyna Matyjaszkiewicz is Gallery Exhibitions manager for Canterbury City Council galleries and museums service.19 Visitor numbers were 8518 in 2005&lt;U+2212&gt;2006 at three hours per week with Sunday openings.20
Exhibits
The present museum was established in 1908, and it currently displays weaponry in the guard chamber between the towers above the road, for three hours on Saturdays. In recent years the towers were also open on Sunday afternoons.21 The roof of one of the towers is accessible via a spiral staircase, and from there an extended view of Canterbury is visible from between the battlements. Exhibits include armaments from the English Civil War to World War II, original prison cells and murder holes by which defenders could kill enemies entering the gateway: boiling oil, molten lead, cannon balls and other material were dropped. The holes are now covered with thick glass, and cars and buses can be seen passing below. Replica armour is available for children to try on.22
Museum access
Rail: Canterbury West; Canterbury EastBuses: National Express; Stagecoach; Canterbury bus station
Projected closure of museum

Since Canterbury City Council suffered loss of income and presented a budget to save money in late 2009, the museum has been threatened with closure which would take place on 18 February 2010. Pressure groups including archaeologists and schools have combined to present alternative measures. A meeting was held on 21 January 2009 at which the Council held a preliminary vote to close three museums, including the West Gate Towers Museum. Objections have been made, and the availability of funds from the National Lottery is being considered for at least one museum.2324

1908 tinted postcard of the museum. One of the three fine 19th century statues is now missing

See also

Entrance to north tower


Herne Bay Museum
Roman Museum
Westgate Hall, Canterbury
Whitstable Museum and Gallery

References
  
Bibliography

Urry, William (1948), Canterbury Mayoral Quincentenary booklet (historical notes)
Tatton-Brown, Tim, et al, (1985), The Westgate museum leaflet

External links

World War II Civil Defence display


Canterbury City Council Online: West Gate Towers Museum webpages
Canterbury City Council Online: What's on at West Gate Towers
Correct access map for West Gate Towers (Pointers to West Gate Towers Museum on many other maps, e.g. Google Earth, are incorrect)
Canterbury City Council Online: Agenda for Exec Committee 21 Jan 2010 (includes link to audio recording of meeting)
Canterbury Archaeological Trust official website
CAT: Images of Roman Canterbury
Aerial photo of walled Canterbury (West Gate Towers is just off the photo to the right)
Time Team: Roman and Saxon archaeology of Canterbury
Time Team: Map of Roman Canterbury (West Gate Towers is &quot;Westgate&quot; on the left, next to the River Stour, as it is today)
BBC panorama (showing Westgate towers, Church of the Holy Cross and River Stour)
BBC panorama (showing Westgate towers from High Street)
Canterbury City Council review of West Gate Towers 2007



Category:Visitor attractions in Kent Category:Museums in Kent Category:Museums established in 1908 Category:Scheduled Ancient Monuments in Kent Category:Grade I listed buildings Category:Buildings and structures in Canterbury Category:Gates in England Category:Visitor attractions in Kent



↩
↩
↩

↩
Information from museum staff↩











↩
Information from spokesperson at Canterbury City Council↩
↩

↩
↩
↩


