
&quot;Theleis I Den Theleis&quot; (Greek: &quot;&lt;U+0398&gt;&lt;U+03AD&gt;&lt;U+03BB&gt;&lt;U+03B5&gt;&lt;U+03B9&gt;&lt;U+03C2&gt; &lt;U+0389&gt; &lt;U+0394&gt;&lt;U+03B5&gt;&lt;U+03BD&gt; &lt;U+0398&gt;&lt;U+03AD&gt;&lt;U+03BB&gt;&lt;U+03B5&gt;&lt;U+03B9&gt;&lt;U+03C2&gt;&quot;; English: &quot;Do You Want to or Not&quot;) is the name of a song released by popular Greek singer Sakis Rouvas in May 1998 by Minos EMI, produced by successful composer Giorgos Theofanous with lyrics by Vangelis Konstantinidis. It was released in Greece and Cyprus as a four track CD single.
Background
Production history
As of late 1997, Rouvas had signed a new contract with Greek record-label giant Minos EMI in favour of his former PolyGram Records. Following the concert for the Greco-Turkish peace and reconciliation that Rouvas gave on the Green Line in Cyprus with the Turkish artist Burak Kut, there was much controversy surrounding Rouvas. The concert had an ill-fated date of May 19, 1997, which coincided with the day of the Pontian genocide. Although many attended the concert and it was a commercial success, and Rouvas was honored with the Internation Abdi Ipek&lt;U+00E7&gt;i Prize for his co-operation and effort, fighting broke out into the audience leaving many youth wounded. Opposing critics believed that this would be the end of Rouvas' career and the phenomenon of his fans. Rouvas and manager Elias Psinakis left Greece for the United States for many months at a time, meanwhile in Greece he was slowly disappearing from the front-pages, as the withdrawal helped the criticisms fade.1
Rouvas returned to Greece, ready to take his career to a more mature level, and came into collaboration with Giorgos Theofanous, one of the most celebrated Greek songwriters of the past decade, who had previously written for Evridiki and then newcomer Antonis Remos. Rouvas' management came into touch with popular lyricist Vangelis Konstantinidis and asked him to write for Rouvas' new material, however, Konstantinidis was hesitant due to the negative image that had been associated with Rouvas recently, and delayed his response. Konstantinidis stated that Rouvas' producers had called him for a final time and asked &quot;Do you want to or not, Vangeli?&quot;, which the lyricist claimed was the inspiration for his first hit with Rouvas.2 Rouvas' collaboration with Konstantinidis would continue on to future albums, also achieving success, while the release of the single would begin his collaboration with rock/folk singer Stelios Rokkos, who wrote the song &quot;Tha Mou Pari Kairo&quot;. Rokkos would go on to write a further three more songs for the album Kati Apo Mena and by the end of the year would produce, along with Rouvas, one of the most acclaimed shows in Greek music history at Bio Bio that would go onto have an encore presentation due to being sold out nightly. Rokkos came to work with Rouvas as a good friend of his, and declared himself to be a big supporter of Rouvas, as he constantly promoted him during his time of receiving very harsh treatment by the media.3
The release of the single, which was his first new material since 1996's Tora Arhizoun Ta Dyskola, proved to revive the artist's career upon returning to Greece, with high sales and sold out concert performances. The single as did its album, featured a more mature sound from Rouvas than previously.
Lyrical content and style
The song is of a 1990s dance-pop style with a strong beat, featuring a lot of bass. It has a large range in dynamics, a style commonly used in many Rouvas songs. Lyrically, the song sees Rouvas asking his lover &quot;Do you want to or not? You will tell me tonight&quot; and asking if she has any room in her heart for him or if she just simply likes the chase. The pre-chorus states &quot;However, at this moment, bruised egos ask with a voice&quot;. He is asking that she decide because he has grown tired of her games and of worrying at nights. He commands that she &quot;cut the mytery&quot;, saying that he has gone through with the love adventure, and her insanity, only to fall in love with her and has become frustrated.
The other three songs from the single also previewed the general idea of Rouvas' forthcoming album, as they experimented with much more different styles in popular music than Rouvas had sung in past years. A good example of this is the song &quot;Tha Mou Pari Kairo&quot; which contained an Eastern oriental flavor, brought by the skills of Rokkos who is known for infusing the two very different genres of rock and la&lt;U+00EF&gt;ka. &quot;Poso Thelo Na 'Xeres&quot; is a serious ballad, while &quot;Ipirhes Panda&quot;, a power-ballad with jazz elements, after the release of the full-length album would go on to become one of the artist's most-recognizable songs. However, the song was not the A-side of the single because the record label thought that a dance song would be more popular. While Rouvas was already known to blend different genres together, critics said that these songs put his style into an even wider range that helped broaden his fan base to consumers of an older generation as well.4
Track listing



#
Title
English translation
Songwriter
Production credit
Time




1.
&quot;Ipirhes Panda&quot;
&quot;You Were Always There&quot;
Vangelis Konstantinidis
Giorgos Theofanous
3:51


2.
&quot;Theleis I Den Theleis&quot;
&quot;Do You Want to or Not&quot;
Vangelis Konstantinidis
Giorgos Theofanous
4:20


3.
&quot;Poso Thelo, Na 'Xeres&quot;
&quot;How I Want You to Know&quot;
Vangelis Konstantinidis
Giorgos Theofanous
3:35


4.
&quot;Tha Mou Pari Kairo&quot;
&quot;It Will Take Me Some Time&quot;
Stelios Rokkos
Stelios Rokkos
4:05



Music video
 The music video of the song kicked off Rouvas' successful collaboration with photographer and director Yorgos Lanthimos, who would go on to create the majority of Rouvas' most acclaimed videos over the next two years. Similar to some of Rouvas' past videos, the video features sexual content, especially for the time of its release that earned it some criticism, while also making it very popular. It contains four scenes, all on one setting, which is an outdoor patio. The video starts by showing quick flashes of various objects, namely a toy gun, a polaroid camera and photographs, a statue, and beach toys. Throughout the video, flashes of Rouvas singing into the camera can be seen while half-naked, playing around in a small outdoor pool. In another recurring scene, Rouvas' is lying down while shirtless while water continuously spalshes over his torso, while the camera angle is right above him, making it appear as he is being trapped by a glass effect. In the second half of the video, Rouvas can be seen dancing on the patio wearing an open purple T-shirt. The other scenes feature Rouvas playing around with two young women who have very similar features, although one is blonde and the other is brunette. In one scene, they are dressed in bikinis, feather boas, stilettos and diamond jewelry and are drinking champagne, while in the other they are dressed more casually. Rouvas blindfolds the two women and sends them off to search for him while he is watching. During the bridge of the song, Rouvas places the brunette woman in front of the target and aims to take a shooting stand, finally shooting her with the plastic gun on the right side of her chest. He then picks up a golf club and shoots the ball, while afterward, he is brought to lie down while the same woman stands over him, taking numerous polaroid photographs while he poses both clothed and in a bathing suit. The video plays with the effects of using fast flashes and off-angle shots in combination with some slow-motion and rewinding shots, such as Rouvas slightly getting out and going fully back into the pool, which is replayed many times.
The video for &quot;Theleis I Den Theleis&quot; would set an example of Lanthimos' work with Rouvas, featuring highly sexual content, as did the photo shoot of the album 21os Akatallilos and subsequent videos such as &quot;Andexa&quot;. This video and ones similar played a part in Rouvas' recognition by media as a sex symbol, while it featured new concepts that helped shape the still young Greek video industry, as &quot;Theleis I Den Theleis&quot; was amongst the most-played videos on MAD TV during the channel's first years of airing.5
Release history



Region
Date
Label
Format




Greece
May 1998
Minos EMI
Radio single, Promo single


June 1998
Minos EMI
CD single



Cyprus
June 1998
Minos EMI
CD single



Credits
Production

Management production: Georgos Theofanous
Composers: Georgos Theofanous (Track 1,2,3), Stelios Rokkos (Track 4)
Lyricists: Vangelis Konstantinidis (Track 1,2,3), Stelios Rokkos (Track 4)
Orchestration: Georgos Theofanous (Track 1,2,3), Haris Andreadis (Track 4),
Programming: Vasilis Nikolopoulos (Track 1,2,3), Elias Ahladiotis (Track 4)
Executive producer: Vangelis Giannopoulos
Production: Minos EMI-A.E.

Personnel

Vocals: Sakis Rouvas (lead), Christina Argyri, Katerina Kyriakou, Alex Panayi, Kostas Hrysis with Giorgos Theofanous and Vangelis Giannopoulos (backing)
Guitar: Savvas Christodoulou
Bass guitar: Nikos Vardis
Electric guitar: Mihalis Armagos
Drums: Andreas Mouzakis
Percussion: &quot;Mohammed&quot;
Keyboards: Haris Andreadis
Photography: Yorgos Lanthimos
Recording and mixing: Vasilis Nikolopoulos with Stratos Diamantis at Power Music Studio
Vocal recording: Tasos Bakasietas, Vangelis Papadopoulos, and Antonis Papathanasiou at Studio Sierra
Mastering: Giannis Ioannidis, Petros Siakavelas-Digital Press Hellas
Transfer: Theodoris Hrysanthopoulos-Fabelsound
Management: Elias Psinakis

Reception
Critical reaction to the song was mostly positive, although many critics doubted that Rouvas would make a significant comeback. Others were not impressed by the modern dance style and sexual content. Although he had stepped down from the stage for many months, he still maintained a strong fanbase who were anxious for a new release, also contributing to the demand of the song. The single was very well received by the commercial audience who quickly brought it to the top of the charts for 10 weeks due to very fast sales.67
Chart performance
The single &quot;Theleis I Den Theleis&quot; was very successful in both Greece and Cyprus, peaking at number 1 on both countries' charts, while the title track also managed to peak at number 1 on the Greek Airplay Chart, becoming a huge hit of the 1990s, with the song itself and its video receiving a lot of airplay.8 Its feature on the album Kati Apo Mena helped the album d&lt;U+00E9&gt;but at number 1 and stay there for 10 weeks, as well. Subsequently, the song &quot;Ipirhes Panda&quot; from the CD single was also released as a radio single, being the last single from the album and peaking at number 1 on the airpay chart for many weeks. The two songs from this single have been hits that have had defining impact on Rouvas' career, being two of his most popular songs that the artist still performs regularly to date.
Charts and certifications



Chart
Providers
Peak
position
Certification




Greek Singles Chart
IFPI
1
Gold


Greek Airplay Chart
IFPI
1



Cypriot Airplay Chart
All Records
1
Gold



References

External links

[http://sakisrouvas.com| Official site]



Category:1998 singles Category:1998 songs Category:Sakis Rouvas songs



↩
↩




↩
↩


