Unreferenced date=December 2009
  cellpadding=3px cellspacing=0px bgcolor=#f7f8ff style=float:right; border:2px solid; margin:5px;

!align=center style=background:#ccf; border-bottom:2px solid colspan=2 Hou Liang Lingdi 
 -
 align=right style=border-top:1px solid Chinese name Family name:  style=border-top:1px solid L ; l
 -
 align=right style=border-top:1px solid Chinese name Given name:  style=border-top:1px solid Zuan , zun
 -
 align=center style=border-top:1px solid Posthumous name:  style=border-top:1px solid Ling , lngliterary meaning: unattentive
 

L Zuan  died 401, courtesy name Yongxu , formally Emperor Ling of Later Liang , was an emperor of the History of China Chinese/Di ethnic group Di state Later Liang.  He was the oldest son of the founding emperor L Guang Emperor Yiwu, but was not L Guang's rightful heir, as he was not born of L Guang's wife Princess Shi.  After L Guang died around new year 400, however, he seized the throne from his younger brother L Shao in a coup.

L Zuan was considered a capable general tactically, but not skilled in general strategy, and during his reign Later Liang's strength continued to be sapped, as it was during the late reign of L Guang, by attacks of rivals Northern Liang and Southern Liang.  Despite this, L Zuan continued to occupy himself with hunting and other unimportant matters.  In 401, he was assassinated by his cousin L Chao , who then supported his own older brother L Long as emperor.

During L Guang's reign
L Zuan was described as favoring exercises in archery, horsemanship, and hunting when he was young, when he was a university student at the Former Qin capital Chang'an during the reign of Fu Jin, where he was not studious.  When Former Qin collapsed in the midst of multiple rebellions in 384 and 385, L Zuan fled initially to Shanggui , in modern Tianshui, Gansu, and then to Guzang , in modern Wuwei, Gansu, where his father had established Later Liang and placed his capital.

The first actual historical reference to L Zuan was in 392, when he served as one of his father L Guang's generals in his campaign against Qifu Gangui, the prince of Western Qin, and L Zuan was unsuccessful in his attack on Qifu Gangui.  In 397, L Guang, who had by then claimed imperial title, sent his son L Zuan then referred to as the Duke of Taiyuan and his brother L Yan  against Qifu Gangui, who had previously agreed to be a vassal and then changed his mind.  Initially, L Zuan was successful, capturing the important city Jincheng , in modern Lanzhou, Gansu, but after his uncle was defeated and killed in a trap laid by Qifu Gangui, L Zuan was forced to withdraw.

Throughout the rest of L Guang's reign, L Zuan became the general that his father relied on the most.  In 397, when the Xiongnu general Juqu Mengxun rebelled, L Guang sent L Zuan against him, and L Zuan was initially successful in defeating Juqu Mengxun and forcing him to flee.  However, after Juqu Mengxun's cousin Juqu Nancheng  persuaded the official Duan Ye to join them and establish Northern Liang, L Guang was faced with a serious rebellion at Guzang itselfa rebellion by the general Yang Gui  and the magician Guo Nen , and L Zuan, while he had Duan Ye's capital Jiankang , in modern Zhangye, Gansu under siege, was forced to withdraw to fight Yang and Guo, allowing Duan Ye's nascent state to survive.  In 398, L Zuan and his brother L Hong  joined forces and defeated Yang and Guo, forcing them to surrender to Southern Liang and Western Qin, respectively.

In 399, L Zuan and his brother L Shao, L Guang's heir apparent, attacked Northern Liang, and were initially successfully, but after Southern Liang's prince Tufa Wugu sent Yang Gui and his brother Tufa Lilugu to aid Northern Liang, L Zuan and L Shao were forced to withdraw.

Coup against L Shao
Around the new year 400, L Guang grew seriously ill.  He ordered L Shao to take the throne as Heavenly Prince Tian Wang, while he himself claimed the title of retired emperor.  L Zuan was put in charge of the military forces, and L Hong the government.  L Guang told the three to be united, and that L Shao should trust his brothers.  He also told L Zuan and L Hong that L Shao might not be talented, but was the rightful heir, and that they should assist him faithfully.  L Guang died later that day.

Initially, L Shao was not going to immediately announce L Guang's death, in fear that it might draw enemy attacks, but L Zuan broke down the door and forcibly entered the palace and mourned.  L Shao became fearful and offered the throne to L Zuan, but L Zuan refused.  L Shao's cousin L Chao  then secretly suggested to L Shao that L Zuan be arrested and executed, but L Shao refused.

However, soon thereafter either that day or at most several days after, L Shao sent his assistant Jiang Ji  to encourage L Zuan to seize the throne.  At night, then, L Zuan led his personal guards to attack the palace.  L Hong joined him.  L Shao's guards initially resisted, and one of them, Qi Cong , hit L Zuan in the head with a sword but could not kill him.  L Chao also tried to assist L Shao, but their forces were fearful of L Zuan and collapsed.  L Shao fled to a secondary palace and committed suicide.  L Zuan took the throne.

Reign
L Zuan initially entrusted L Hong with all governmental matters, and also tried to show generosity by pardoning Qi Chong and L Chao.  However, L Zuan and L Hong soon became suspicious of each other, and in spring 400, L Hong rebelled with his troops.  L Zuan defeated L Hong's rebellion, and permitted his troops to pillage even the capital city Guzang itself, rewarding the women of the secondary district Dongwan , eastern half of Guzang to his soldiersincluding L Hong's wife and daughters.  While he later relented and cancelled those orders under suggestion of Fang Gui , the damage had been done.  When L Hong was subsequently captured during his flight to Southern Liang, L Zuan had him executed cruellyby having his ribs repeatedly bounded.

Also in 400, L Zuan created his wife Empress Yang Ling Lady Yang empress.

L Zuan soon started a campaign against Southern Liang, whose prince was by now Tufa Lilugu, but he was quickly defeated by Tufa Lilugu's brother Tufa Rutan.  In summer, he started another campaign against Northern Liang, which was initially successful, as he put Northern Liang's new capital Zhangye , in modern Zhangye, Gansu under siege, but as the official Jiang Ji , who tried to persuade him not to carry out the campaign, predicted, Tufa Rutan made a major attack and even entered the city of Guzang before retreating, forcing L Zuan to end his campaign against Northern Liang.

Despite these military defeats, L Zuan spent much of his time drinking and hunting.  When his official Yang Ying  tried to persuade him to change his ways, he thanked and apologized to Yang, but could not change his ways.

In 401, L Chao, without prior approval from L Zuan, attacked the Xianbei chief Sipan .  Sipan sent his brother Qizhen  to file a protest with L Zuan, and L Zuan summoned L Chao and Sipan both to Guzang, which got L Chao nervous.  Once L Zuan met with both, he threatened L Chao with deathbut had  no intent to carry the threat out; rather, he intended only to scare L Chao.  He then held a feast for L Chao and Sipan, intending to create peace between them.  During the feast, L Chao's brother L Long repeatedly offered L Zuan wine, and L Zuan was soon drunk.  He sat on a man-pulled cart and gave L Chao and Sipan a tour of the palace.  When the cart came to a threshold between two palaces, the cart could not roll over the threshold, and L Zuan's guards Dou Chuan  and Luo Teng  left their swords on the side in order to lift the cart across.  As they did, L Chao took their swords and attacked L Zuan.  L Zuan tried to combat L Chao, unarmed, but L Chao quickly pierced him with a sword.  Both Dou and Luo tried to combat L Chao but were also killed by him.  L Zuan's wife Empress Yang tried to mobilize the guards to combat L Chao, but the guards soon abandoned her, and L Chao made his brother L Long emperor to succeed L Zuan.  L Zuan's head was cut off and shown to the populace, but L Zuan was still later given an imperial posthumous name, albeit an unflattering one.

Era name
 Xianning  xan nng 400-401

Personal information
 Father
 L Guang Emperor Yiwu
 Wife
 Empress Yang Ling Empress Yang created 400, committed suicide 401

Start box
S-reg
Succession box title=Emperor of Later Liang before=L Shao Prince Yin after=L Long years=400-401
End box

DEFAULTSORT:Lu Zuan
Category:Later Liang emperors
Category:401 deaths
Category:Former Qin people
Category:5th-century Chinese monarchs

ja:
zh:
