The CMPA, or Canadian Medical Protective Association, is an organization headquartered in Ottawa, Ontario which provides legal defence and liability protection to physicians across Canada. The organization was founded at the 1901 annual meeting of the Canadian Medical Association. The CMPA was incorporated by Act of Parliament on 27 February 1913, and given Royal Assent on 16 May 1913. Approximately 95% of Canadian doctors join the CMPA. In 2010 the membership rolls recorded more than 76,000 physicians. 1
The CMPA describes itself as a &quot;not-for-profit, mutual defence organization run for the benefit of physicians, by physicians.&quot; A for-profit organization exists to earn money and to distribute surplus funds to its owners and shareholders. A not-for-profit organization exists solely to provide programs and services that are of self-benefit. A non-profit organization (NPO) is allowed to earn a surplus or profit, but such earnings are retained by the organization for the future plans and self-preservation of its members. Types of NPOs vary widely (examples are charities, public arts organizations, and trade unions. In 2008, the Ontario Superior Court ruled that the Canadian Medical Protective Association was a trade union.2
History of the CMPA
CMPA Core Values:  On their 100th anniversary, the CMPA published A History of the Canadian Medical Protective Association 1901-2001.3 This lengthy document contains excerpts from the earliest CMPA annual reports, and here we find the seeds of the accountability crisis which imperils Canadian healthcare today. Verbatim from pages 7-9:

&quot;Object of the New Association Dr. R.W. Powell, who was the first president of the CMPA, retained the position for 33 years. Dr. Powell&lt;U+2019&gt;s annual reports optimistically predicted the CMPA would be a large and important organization while describing the difficulties in increasing the membership. His reports are interspersed with harangues on recruiting new members and the 1911 annual report boasted: We have struck terror into the evil minded who have sought to besmirch and even blackmail members of our noble profession. The business of the CMPA was and still is protecting physicians, which it does by hiring the best legal help. Testament to the calibre of the legal assistance is evidenced by the number of CMPA counsel who have been appointed to the bench in provincial and federal courts through the years.&quot;


&quot;Incorporation - A Stormy Passage The Act of Incorporation generated considerable lively debate in both the House of Commons and Senate of Canada. Members of Parliament received petitions objecting to it. Feelings ran high. An MP said in debate: I think this legislation is dangerous. It is legislation against the interests of the mass of the people, and is the creation of a monopolistic corporation... against the rights of the individual in the matter of the selection of his method of cure and treatment in the case of disease. Speaking about protecting the rights of the individual, another MP summed up: If the individual realizes that instead of going up against a man whom he believes to be guilty, he has to go up against a strong corporation composed of the medical men of the country, with a fund at their disposal to fight such cases, I think he will feel that an injustice is being done. There was also concern about recruiting physicians to support a plaintiff's case in court.&quot;


&quot;Consistent Core Values Dr Powell often reiterated the value: Our organization does not consist in the fights we have put up or in the open success we have had but rather in the silent influence we have swayed against litigants who for a money gain have sought to blast the reputation of conscientious, painstaking and reputable practitioners knowing or suspecting that they have an easy mark and that to avoid publicity a medical man will often submit to what amounts to blackmail. These litigants have found out that our Counsel stands ready to accept service of the writ and your Executive stands ready with a bank account to furnish the sinews of war. Dozens and dozens of cases have thus been strangled at their inception and have disappeared like dew off the grass. This feature gentlemen is the strength and glory of your association. (CMPA Annual Report, 1919)&quot;

Modern Public Scrutiny:  In 2003, CBC News broadcast Inside the CMPA,4 the first in-depth look at the Canadian Medical Protective Association. Featured was former CMPA insider Paul Harte who broke with that organization and blew the whistle. Harte offered firsthand, material knowledge of how that organization works. The broadcast discussed five patients (Morgan Bystedt, Betty O&lt;U+2019&gt;Reilly, Shannon Shobridge, Anne McSween, and Lorraine Emmonds) who suffered serious injury or death due to medical negligence. At the very time those patients were ill and in anguish, all were subjected to deliberate wearing-down tactics from the CMPA. Lawyers and judges said in interview: &quot;The CMPA fights them so hard. The CMPA takes the view that anyone suing doctors is basically in the extortion business. Sounds outrageous, but that&lt;U+2019&gt;s what the editors of a medical journal said 100 years ago when the CMPA was first established. Most of these cases arise out of complete ignorance or from a desire to extort money, the journal read. Doctors therefore needed a powerful and well managed protective association to defend them.&quot;
Modern Professional Scrutiny:  Health policy experts have begun to scrutinize the core values of the CMPA. Those values were always at variance with reality, but the impact is more serious today because medical choices are more complex and high-risk. In 2006, the American Medical Association searched electronic databases to find studies pertaining to physician self-assessment. Studies were collected from the USA, Canada, United Kingdom, Australia and New Zealand. Uniformly, the studies showed that doctors aren&lt;U+2019&gt;t the best judges of their own abilities. The worst accuracy in self-assessment occurred among MDs who were the most confident, and those who were the least skilled. &lt;U+201C&gt;They didn&lt;U+2019&gt;t seem to know that they didn&lt;U+2019&gt;t know,&lt;U+201D&gt; said author Dr. Davis. Clinical competence is linked to the ability of physicians to assess their own learning needs and choose educational activities that meet these needs. The report, published in JAMA, concluded: Physicians have a limited ability to accurately self-assess. The processes currently used to undertake professional development and evaluate competence may need to focus more on external assessment.5 6
Liability Coverage
The CMPA describes itself as a &quot;mutual defence&quot; organization for doctors. When a doctor is brought before the Canadian Justice System, the doctor's legal defense is funded by the CMPA, which sets no boundaries on the type of cases it takes. The CMPA will defend a doctor sued in civil court for medical negligence causing injury. With equal vigor, the CMPA will defend a doctor charged in criminal court for offences ranging from financial fraud (such as over-billing), to malfeasance, to sexual battery, to felony crimes.7 8 9 10 11
The results of the 2008 Canadian Healthcare Safety Symposium were reported thus in the Canadian Medical Association Journal:

&quot;The progress of the patient safety movement is being stymied by regulatory, structural and attitudinal problems, according to speakers at the eighth annual Canadian Healthcare Safety Symposium. A 'huge gulf' exists between the number of Canadian patients injured by negligence and those who receive compensation, said University of Alberta law professor Gerald Robertson. 'One must seriously question the efficacy of a model which compensates so few who are entitled to it.' Only about 2% of patients injured by negligence in Canada receive compensation, he said, basing his calculation on figures from the Canadian Medical Protective Association research estimating the number of preventable adverse events in Canadian hospitals. Meanwhile, the number of lawsuits against Canadian doctors is dropping &lt;U+2014&gt; down 30% since 1998 (from 1339 suits commenced in 1998, to 928 suits in 2007) &lt;U+2014&gt; and only 30% of plaintiffs seeking compensation are successful in court, Robertson noted. Medical negligence cases are complex, time-consuming, expensive and almost always undertaken on a contingency-fee basis. As a result, lawyers are unlikely to take on cases unless there is a chance of a settlement valued over $100 000, he said, noting that lawyers usually seek a fee equal to 30% of a successful settlement. The patient-safety movement may 'raise consciousness' about the need for better compensation for patients, since it will likely raise awareness about the frequency of adverse medical events.&quot; 12

One claimant who received compensation, Cambleford resident John Lewis, said &quot;one of the main barriers to patient safety in this country&quot; is the the Canadian Medical Protective Association. &quot;It's extremely powerful because of the political influence it wields.&quot; 13





CMPA &lt;U+2014&gt; National Statistics 2008
Number




Legal actions commenced
884


Legal actions proceeding to trial &lt;U+2192&gt; won by the patient
13


Legal actions proceeding to trial &lt;U+2192&gt; won by the doctor
75


Legal actions settled out of court
341


Legal actions dismissed, discontinued, or abandoned
574







The national statistics for negligence lawsuits shown in the table (right) are from the 2008 CMPA Annual Report. 14 The CMPA does not distinguish between lawsuits which are dismissed, discontinued, or abandoned, but provides only an accumulated total for this category. Often, a Statement of Claim is filed years before the case is resolved, thus the number of actions commenced in a given year need not equal the sum of the resolved cases in that year.
CMPA Financial Sources
Doctors contribute annual fees to the CMPA. Provincial governments reimburse a portion of those fees as part of negotiated contracts with provincial medical associations. The government delivers the cash without any strings attached, despite complaints that public money should not be used to defend doctors accused of criminal wrongdoing or over-billing.15 Civil trial lawyers fear that huge subsidies paid to fund the defence of doctors creates an unequal playing field for patients who hope to pursue a medical negligence case. In essence, the government is funding one side of a legal dispute, but not the other.16 Former Ontario Chief Justice Charles Dubin commented on the differential treatment: &lt;U+201C&gt;Although it is in the public interest that any person charged with a criminal offence be properly represented, it seems difficult to justify public expenditures to place doctors on a different footing from other accused persons.&lt;U+201D&gt; 17
The Canadian Medical Protective Association denies getting any direct government money. But the truth is: British Columbia, and the other provinces, heavily subsidize the annual fees doctors pay to the CMPA. Those fees permitted the CMPA to amass nearly $3 billion in a war chest used to &quot;defend every case against a doctor that is defensible.&quot; One MD was charged in criminal court for sexually assaulting multiple patients, was convicted, then was sued by those victims in civil court. The CMPA funded the doctor's criminal defence, and despite the guilty verdict, the CMPA went on to fund the doctor's civil defence. The CMPA, however, will not pay civil damages to a patient assaulted by a doctor even if the assault occurred during a medical exam. This scenario is seen by many as stacking the deck against victims attempting to seek redress from physicians. It is particularly galling for victims to discover the CMPA receives regular government money.18
In 2008, Ontario taxpayers spent $112 million to subsidize the medical malpractice fees paid by doctors. Doctors themselves paid just $24 million, which means taxpayers picked up 83 percent of the cost of the malpractice fees. The massive subsidies paid to the CMPA are part of a little-publicized &quot;Memorandum of Understanding&quot; that exists between the Ontario Ministry of Health, the Ontario Medical Association, and the Canadian Medical Protective Association. Details of this Memorandum of Understanding between the parties was kept from public view until a court ordered it released following a Freedom of Information request in 2008.19
Freedom of Information Request
In Ontario, the applicant who made the 2008 Freedom of Information request remains anonymous. He or she was represented in court by adjudicator Daphne Loukidelis. Together they used the FOI Act to request disclosure from the Canadian Medical Protective Association. They argued that under the law, the CMPA fits the description of a trade union, and should be subject to the same rules of disclosure as trade unions. The court agreed, and ordered full disclosure. The judicial decision is: Canadian Medical Protective Association v. Loukidelis, 2008, Ontario Superior Court. 20
Legal Cases
Dr. Richard Austin ~ Joan Jaikaran is one of several women who filed million-dollar lawsuits against Dr. Richard Austin of The Scarborough Hospital, claiming her internal organs were inadvertently cut during surgery. There is no way to evaluate whether that number of lawsuits is unusual for an obstetrician-gynecologist. The Canadian Medical Protective Association doesn't disclose figures on lawsuits by medical specialty. There is a wall of silence surrounding what are called adverse events in Ontario hospitals. As of 2007, there was no public transparency or accountability built into the system.21
Dr. Mark Stewart ~ Debbie Maki was one of 22 abused patients who sued convicted molester Dr. Mark Stewart along with the College of Physicians and Surgeons. Said Maki: &quot;There is a need to challenge a system that enables doctors to abuse patients without repercussion or reproach.&quot; Ultimately, Dr. Stewart was convicted of nine indecent assault charges and sentenced to four years federal time. The College never provided a tally of the complaints it amassed against Stewart during his 25-year practice, but records indicate police interviewed 60 patients before charging him with 76 sex crimes relating to his medical treatment. Stewart continued practicing and abusing patients long after Maki complained in 1994 to college officials. Meanwhile, Stewart's civil legal fees as well as his criminal legal representation was covered by the Canadian Medical Protective Association.22 23 24
Vegreville Hospital ~ In 2007, authorities closed this Alberta hospital to new admissions after inspectors reported faulty sterilization and flesh-contaminated surgical tools. The hospital had a clear responsibility to prevent the risk of spreading infection. But patients who sue must take on the Canadian Medical Protective Association. An Alberta lawyer said: &quot;It's a David versus Goliath scenario. Doctors, through the CMPA, can expect to have the top medical specialists speak in their defence. They have the access, the contacts, the money. Lawyers for patients have a harder time finding experts who will testify against fellow doctors.&quot; A senior Quebec attorney added: &quot;Patients In Quebec have an advantage over those in other provinces because of legislation guaranteeing safety of care. It's one reason why Quebecers who sue have better than 50-50 odds of winning. The average in the rest of Canada is 30 to 35 per cent.&quot; 25
Dr. Errol Wai-Ping ~ Obstetrician Dr. Wai-Ping amassed a multitude of patient complaints against him dating back to 1992. The women with obstetrical injuries established a &quot;common cause,&quot; and in 2001 launched a Class Action suit against Dr. Wai-Ping, with 375 plaintiffs claiming $25 million in total damages. Finally in 2004 the College of Physicians and Surgeons reviewed the cases and declared Wai-Ping incompetent, noting his complication rate for some procedures was 20 times the provincial average. Dr. Wai-Ping lost his license. However, by 2006 the Class-Action suit was still dragging through the courts, beset by motions filed by lawyers defending Wai-Ping and paid for by the Canadian Medical Protective Association. This illustrates what victims say is an unjust system that pits patients against a rich physicians' defence fund &lt;U+2013&gt; financed largely by taxpayers &lt;U+2013&gt; that offers no accountability in how it spends the money and gives doctors little incentive to settle. Lawyer Paul Harte cautions: &quot;The CMPA defence fund is unlicensed, unregulated and not subject to public scrutiny of their books.&quot; 26
Scorched Earth Policy ~ In a recent malpractice case, the Canadian Medical Protective Association openly did their utmost to grind down two plaintiffs who were already depleted from the injury caused by the doctor's negligence. The Judge remarked on the aggressive CMPA tactics: &lt;U+201C&gt;The plaintiff prevailed at trial in this medical malpractice case and recovered a judgment that requires the defendant Dr. Haukioja to pay damages and interest calculated to total $1,914,807.90. Owing to the defendant&lt;U+2019&gt;s scorched earth policy of putting the plaintiffs to the test of establishing virtually all of his claims on all issues of damages and liability, the trial extended over some 20 days. Central issues were complex and vigorously contested.&lt;U+201D&gt; The judicial decision is Frazer v. Haukioja, 2008, Ontario Superior Court. 27
Waiting List Lawsuits ~ Courts will soon focus on how physicians manage and monitor patients' conditions while they are waiting for care. If a patient is injured due to treatment waiting lists across Canada, the patient may now file a civil claim.28 29 In 2007, the CMPA released a report titled &quot;Wait Times: A Medical Liability Perspective.&quot; 30 Among the recommendations issued by the CMPA: Doctors should advocate hard for their patients for medical procedures the doctor thinks are necessary.
CBC News: Inside the CMPA
There is increasing evidence that the CMPA is overzealous in its defense of medical malpractice cases. Attorney Paul Harte acts on behalf of patients who suffer medical damage. But that is recently. For many decades, Harte sat on the other side of the table, helping doctors manufacture a defence in court cases. As part of that job, he worked closely with the Canadian Medical Protective Association. Harte became disillusioned with the CMPA, broke with them, and blew the whistle. As an insider he has firsthand, material knowledge of how that organization works. Paul Harte, along with former B.C. Supreme Court judge Thomas Berger, think it is time Canadians were informed about the brutal CMPA tactics. They spoke out in the CBC News broadcast Inside the CMPA:

&quot;It is driven by protecting the doctor's reputation, almost at all costs. The CMPA would spend $100,000 protecting the doctor against a $5,000 claim. The CMPA may keep a low profile, but if you sue a doctor, it's almost always the Canadian Medical Protective Association running the show. Ninety-five percent of Canadian doctors are members. Just how far will the CMPA go to protect a doctor? The legal strategy is well worn: Deny the doctor did anything wrong, even when the negligence seems pretty clear. That's their strategy. It's coordinated across the country. It's intended to make these cases as difficult as possible for plaintiffs. The truth is, few plaintiffs &lt;U+2013&gt; or their lawyers &lt;U+2013&gt; survive the CMPA's suffocating tactics.&quot; 31

No-Fault Medical Compensation
In 1913 the CMPA was incorporated with a single goal in mind &lt;U+2013&gt; to protect doctors at any and all costs. In those days, an imbalance of knowledge between doctor and patient led to an imbalance of power in the doctor-patient relationship. This led to rife abuse by MDs, both in the healthcare system32 33 and in the court system.34 35 The arrival of the internet brought a sea change.36 37 Today, objective medical information is so readily available that patients no longer need to live in a city with a university medical library to become informed about their own health conditions. Doctor rating sites have sprung up, covering every continent.38 39 The skill level of MDs, or lack thereof, can no longer be cloaked in silence.40 41 Doctors will need to keep up to date with technical advances in their field, and offer more than lip-service to ethics.42 43 Patients are demanding a medical Glasnost of transparency and accountability.44 45 46
One point recently illuminated is the ruthless self-interest of the CMPA, along with the plight of patients who are injured by healthcare workers, then abandoned. To deal fairly with medical negligence, experts want to replace our current adversarial system with No-Fault Medical Compensation. In 2008, the Canadian Medical Association Journal printed a three-part series on this topic.47 48 49 In 2008, Healthcare Quarterly published &quot;Giving Back the Pen: Disclosure, Apology and Early Compensation After Harm in the Health Care Setting.&quot; The title refers to a comment made by Bishop Desmond Tutu regarding the importance of restitution after harm: If you take my pen and say you are sorry and don't give me back my pen, nothing has happened.50
See also

Canadian Medical Association
Medical Malpractice
Negligence
Medical Ethics

External links

Canadian Medical Protective Association
Medical Malpractice Liability: Canada Library of Congress
Inside the CMPA CBC News 2003
Building a Safer System National Integrated Strategy for Improving Patient Safety in Canadian Health Care
Collation of news reports dated 2003-2010 which unveiled the hidden finances and scorched-earth tactics of the Canadian Medical Protective Association

References

Category:Health organizations in Canada Category:Canadian medical associations



CMPA Act of Incorporation 1913↩
Legal Decision: Canadian Medical Protective Association v. Loukidelis 2008 Ontario Superior Court↩
A History of the Canadian Medical Protective Association 1901-2001↩
Inside the CMPA CBC News 2003↩
Accuracy of Physician Self-Assessment Compared with Observed Measures of Competence: Systematic Review 2006 JAMA 296(9)↩
MD Confidence Doesn&lt;U+2019&gt;t Ensure Capability The Medical Post (26 September 2006)↩
Under Exposed: The Secret Discipline of B.C.'s Professions Victoria Times Colonist (25 September 2008)↩
Doctors in Trouble: How Taxpayers' Money Rescues Physicians Facing Legal Problems Victoria Times Colonist (19 February 2008)↩
Taxpayers Helped Doctor Get Name Off Offender Registry Victoria Times Colonist (16 February 2008)↩
Confidential Programs Let Addicted Doctors Practice While in Rehab Hamilton Spectator (18 December 2007)↩
Assault: The Doctors Who Committed These Offences Are Still WorkingHamilton Spectator (27 October 2007)↩
Patient-Safety Reforms Inhibited by Systemic Impediments 2008 CMAJ 179(12)↩
'Grieving Warrior' Pushes for Patient Safety Community Press (February 2010)↩
CMPA Annual Report 2008↩
B.C. Probes Why Public Cash Helped MD Offender Victoria Times Colonist (19 February 2008)↩
We Have a Right to Know Details of Doctors' Deal Hamilton Spectator (11 February 2009)↩
Doctors Get Cadillac Representation While Poor Go Without Law Times (7 December 2009)↩
$3 Billion War Chest Gives Doctors Advantage in Court Victoria Times Colonist (17 February 2008)↩
Taxpayers Footing the Bill for Malpractice Insurance Hamilton Spectator (7 February 2009)↩

The Unkindest Cut Toronto Star (17 March 2007]↩
Convicted MD Escapes Sex Offender Registry Vancouver Province (11 April 2008)↩
Sex Offender Appeal Funded B.C. Doctor: Taxpayer-aided defence fund helped him off registry. Vancouver Province (17 February 2008)↩
Sexually Abused Patient Ponders Civil Trial Vancouver Province (21 September 2007)↩
Suing Vegreville Hospital Difficult Edmonton Journal (22 March 2007)↩
Malpractice Costs Soar, You Get the Bill Toronto Star (1 April 2006)↩
Legal Decision: Frazer v. Haukioja 2008 Ontario Superior Court↩
Wait-Time Guarantees a Real Risk for Doctors, says CMPA The Medical Post (4 September 2007)↩
Doctors Warned of Waiting List Lawsuits Vancouver Sun (23 August 2007)↩
Wait Times: A Medical Liability Perspective↩

Understanding Performance Difficulties in Doctors: Bibliography National Clinical Assessment Authority (UK)↩
Teaching Disruptive Physicians Collegiality↩
Dr. Charles Smith: Goudge Report Inquiry into Pediatric Forensic Pathology in Ontario 2008↩
Dr. Joel Yelland: Testimony Convicts Innocents Injusticebusters 2004↩
Operating in the Dark: The Accountability Crisis in Canada's Healthcare System Healthcare Quarterly 1998 (v2)↩
To Err Is Human ... in Canada Too 2004 Canadian Institute of Health Information↩
Website RateMDs.com↩
Website DoctorRate.com↩
Website Medhaps: Case by Case Study of Medical Mishaps↩
Canadian Disclosure Guidelines 2008 The Canadian Patient Safety Institute↩
Mandatory Reporting of Suspect Colleagues Coming in Ontario The Medical Post (26 September 2008)↩
[http://www.cmaj.ca/cgi/content/full/177/3/265?maxtoshow=&amp;HITS=10&lt;U+2026&gt;ext=and&amp;searchid=1&amp;FIRSTINDEX=0&amp;sortspec=date&amp;resourcetype=HWCIT Disclosing Medical Errors to Patients: Status Report] 2007 CMAJ 177(3)↩
Hospital Death-Rate Report Triggers Calls for Action Toronto Star (1 December 2007)↩
Patients Win Right to Know Toronto Star (5 May 2007)↩
Stop Shielding Doctors, Patients Demand Toronto Star (20 April 2007)↩
Fault / No-Fault (Part 1): Bearing the Brunt of Medical Mishaps 2008 CMAJ 179(4)↩
Fault / No-Fault (Part 2): Uneasy Bedfellows 2008 CMAJ 179(5)↩
Fault / No-Fault (Part 3): Vested Interests and the Silence of Suffering Patients Cited as Obstacles to System Change 2008 CMAJ 179(6)↩
Giving Back the Pen: Disclosure, Apology and Early Compensation After Harm in the Health Care Setting Healthcare Quarterly 2008 (v11)↩


