








The Citadel presidents




William F. Graham|Capt William F. Graham, USA


Maj Richard W. Colcock, USA


Francis W. Capers|BG Francis W. Capers, CSA


Peters F. Stevens|Major Peters F. Stevens, SCM


James Benjamin White|Maj James B. White, SCM


John P. Thomas|Col John P. Thomas, CSA


BG George D. Johnston, CSA


Asbury Coward|Col Asbury Coward, CSA


Col Oliver J. Bond, SCM


Gen Charles P. Summerall, USA


Gen Mark W. Clark, USA


Gen Hugh P. Harris, USA


MG James A. Duckett, SCM


LTG George M. Seignious, USA


VADM James A. Stockdale, USN


MG James Grimsley, Jr., USA


Lt Gen Cladius E. Watts, USAF


MajGen John S. Grinalds, USMC


Lt Gen John W. Rosa, Jr., USAF







The Citadel, The Military College of South Carolina, also known simply as The Citadel, is a state-supported, comprehensive college located in Charleston, South Carolina, USA. It is one of the six senior military colleges in the United States, and has 14 academic departments divided into five schools offering 20 majors and 25 minors.
College overview
Established in 1842, The Citadel is best known for its undergraduate Corps of Cadets military program for men and women, which combines academics, physical challenges and military discipline.1
The Citadel Corps of Cadets, over 2,200 strong, is the largest military college outside of the federal military academies. The Citadel provides military commissions in all four services (Army, Navy, Air Force, and Marine Corps) through the Reserve Officers' Training Corps (ROTC).2 The exception to this is the veterans program, reinstated in the fall of 2007, which allows cadets who left The Citadel for active military duty to return.3
Cadets also share classes with active-duty enlisted Marine Corps and Navy personnel. These active duty military NCOs attend The Citadel with cadets through the Marine Enlisted Commissioning Program (MECEP) and other programs to receive their military commissions. The Citadel was the first Marine-Oriented Naval Reserve Officer Training Corps (NROTC) unit established in 1970. The Marine-Oriented unit is always commanded by a Marine Corps Colonel. The MECEP Program, established in 1973, was also the first in the nation.
Graduates serve in all four of the nation&lt;U+2032&gt;s military services. This small and elite college has produced over 260 general officers and admirals. The college has also produced several state governors, U.S. Senators, congressmen, legal scholars, physicians, nationally acclaimed engineers, and 46 college presidents.
Early History
On December 20, 1842, the South Carolina Legislature passed an Act &quot;to convert the Arsenal at Columbia, and The Citadel and Magazine in and near Charleston, into Military Schools&quot; thereby transforming the two State Arsenals into the South Carolina Military Academy. The act specified:

That the students when admitted, shall be formed into a military corps, and shall constitute the public guard of the Arsenal at Columbia, and of the Citadel and Magazine in and near Charleston...to guard effectually, the public arms and other property at the places aforsaid...4

 The institution was called the South Carolina Military Academy and consisted of two campuses, The Citadel Academy in Charleston and The Arsenal Academy in Columbia, SC. The first 20 cadets reported to The Citadel Academy, then located at Marion Square in downtown Charleston, on March 20, 1843 and 14 reported to The Arsenal Academy. The name of the college was officially changed in 1910 to &quot;The Citadel, The Military College of South Carolina&quot;. 5 The first class graduated with 6 receiving their diplomas in 1846. The Citadel Corps of Cadets trained and prepared South Carolina's famous Palmetto Regiment for the Mexican-American War in 1846. Seventeen Citadel Cadets and alumni served in the Mexican war. Six of those alumni were killed or died of exposure, disease, and harship of military service. Five were wounded in action. The Palmetto Regiment's flag, introduced at The Citadel, was the first United States flag to fly over Mexico City on September 13, 1847.
The Citadel in the Civil War
When South Carolina seceded from the Union in December 1860, Major Robert Anderson moved his garrison of U.S. troops to Fort Sumter and requested reinforcements from the federal government. On January 9, 1861, Citadel Cadets George Edward Haynsworth and Samuel Bonneau Pickens fired the first shots of the Civil War. The Corps of Cadets fired four 24 pound artillery pieces from their Morris Island artillery battery at the U.S. steamer, the Star of the West, preventing it from reaching Fort Sumter with 200 U.S. Army combat troops and supplies. The cadets fired 17 shots in rapid succession with three rounds striking the ship. When this incident occurred South Carolina was alone in secession. This was a pivotal event in U.S. history and led to a polarization between northern and southern states. Within three weeks, six other States (Texas, Mississippi, Georgia, Florida, Alabama, and Louisiana) formed the Confederate States of America. On February 9, 1861, exactly one month after the Star of the West engagement, Jefferson Davis was elected President of the Southern Confederacy by delegates from the seven states. The Star of the West incident is considered by some historians to be the &quot;first shot fired&quot; in the American Civil War.6 Most Civil War historians, however, consider the &quot;first shot&quot; to be a mortar fired on Fort Sumter from Fort Johnson on April 12, 1861.
On January 28, 1861, the Corps of Cadets was made a part of the military organization of the state and named the Battalion of State Cadets during military operations. The Academy continued to operate as a military academy, but classes were often disrupted when the governor called the cadets into military service. Mounting and manning heavy guns, performing guard duty, providing security and escorting prisoners were among the services performed by the cadets. They were known as the Battalion of State Cadets and participated in the following engagements from 1861 to 1865. As a result of the combat service of the The Citadel Corps of Cadets, the Regimental Colors have nine Confederate battle streamers:

Confederate States Army
Star of the West, January 9, 1861
Wappoo Cut, November 1861
James Island, June 1862
Charleston and Vicinity, July-October 1863
James Island, June 1864
Tulifinny, December 1864
James Island, December 1864-February 1865
Williamston, May 1865

In early December 1864, Governor Bonham ordered the Battalion of State Cadets to Tulifinny Creek to join a small Confederate force defending the Charleston and Savannah Railroad. On December 7 and December 9, the cadets fought Union forces, successfully defending the rail line and forcing Union forces to withdraw. The cadets suffered eight casualties at Tulifinny Creek. The battalion was commended for its display of discipline and gallantry under fire and won the admiration of the troops who fought with them. The flag of the Corps of Cadets includes eight battle streamers, representing these engagements, and one streamer representing the Confederate States Army.
The Citadel Academy in Charleston was captured and occupied by U.S. Army troops in February 1865 while the Corps of Cadets were deployed to the battlefields of South Carolina. The Arsenal Academy (The Citadel's prepapratory school) in Columbia, South Carolina was reduced to rubble and ash when Major General William T. Sherman burned the city in 1865. The only building left standing from the old Arsenal Academy was the Officers' Quarters which were built in 1855. This building has since served as the South Carolina Governors' Mansion since 1868. It has housed all Governors since then to include five Citadel graduates.
The Corps of Cadets remained on the field of battle for nearly 5 1/2 months and fired the last shots East of the Mississippi River at Williamston, SC on May 1, 1865. The Cadets left The Citadel barracks on December 4, 1864 and were deployed to defend the Charleston-Savannah Railroad near the Tulifinny River. The Corps of Cadets remained on the field of battle until disbanded on May 9, 1865 when they received their final orders of the war on the steps of the courthouse in Newberry, South Carolina. The cadets were the last organized southern force on the eastern seaboard to disband.
Rebuilding From the Ashes of War
Considered the &quot;West Point of the South,&quot; The Citadel was captured and occupied by U.S. Army troops from 1865 to 1882. The Citadel was the only college considered a &quot;captured military post&quot; by the federal government. Alumni, led by Governor Johnson Hagood, class of 1847, regained the college through a highly disciplined and spirited effort that lasted 17 years.
Following the war, the Board of Visitors eventually regained possession of The Citadel campus, and the South Carolina Legislature passed an act to reopen the college. The 1882 session began with an enrollment of 185 cadets.
Emergence as America's college of the citizen-soldier
In the war with Spain in 1898, more Citadel alumni volunteered for service than were needed. In World War I, Citadel graduates were among the first contingents of American troops to fight with the English and French divisions. By that time, The Citadel had outgrown its campus on Marion Square, despite numerous building additions. In 1918, the city of Charleston offered the state of South Carolina 176 acres (0.7 km&lt;U+00B2&gt;) on the banks of the Ashley River for a new campus on the condition that the state fund the construction of a new Citadel campus there.7 The state accepted the offer on February 26, 1919, and alloted $300,000 towards the construction of a new campus.8 The college moved to its current location in 1922.
The title of the head of The Citadel was changed from Superintendent to President in 1921, when The Citadel moved to its present location. Col Oliver J. Bond was the last Superintendent and the first President of The Citadel.
Citadel graduates have performed military service for their country in major conflicts. These include World Wars I and II, Korea, Vietnam, Operation Desert Storm, Operation Enduring Freedom (Afghanistan), and Operation Iraqi Freedom.
The entire class of 1944 was inducted into the U.S. armed forces during World War II, and only two members graduated. This was the first instance where an entire class of students was inducted into military service at once since the the Citadel Corps of Cadets fought as a unit at the Battle of Tulifinny in December 1864 during the Civil War.9
Since its humble beginnings in 1842, The Citadel has grown to become America's largest state-supported military college. In the early years (1842&lt;U+2013&gt;1848), the Corps had only 150 cadets. In 1849, a third story was added to The Citadel's barracks which allowed the Corps of Cadets to grow to 225. During the Civil War, the Corps of Cadets mustered a record high of 343 during the Battle of Tulifinny in December 1864. Despite these significant gains, The Citadel was still relatively small as compared to other military colleges during this period. The effects of the Civil War were felt at The Citadel for decades. The &quot;West Point of the South&quot; was captured and occupied by the U.S. Army. The U.S. War Department considered The Citadel to be a &quot;captured military post&quot;. It took alumni 17 long years to regain &quot;The Citadel U.S. Army Post&quot; from the federal government after the Civil War. In 1882 there were 185 in the Corps of Cadets. By 1898, the college was beginning to outgrow its campus and was emerging to be one of the largest military colleges in the nation. The &quot;West Point of the South&quot; became well known and graduates were accepted to the finest universities in the nation for advanced degrees. In 1922, the Corps of Cadets numbered 500 and six years later there were 1,000 cadets. The Great Depression slowed the growth of the college, but by 1939 The Citadel became the second largest state-supported military college in the nation with 1500 cadets. During The Citadel's 100th anniversary and the centennial celebration of the college in 1942, the Corps numbered 2,000 cadets. Today, The Citadel is the largest state-supported military college in the United States with a Corps of Cadets that is over 2,200 strong.
Rankings

Replica of the Citadel flag flown by Cadets between 1861 to 1865

In 2010, The Citadel was listed among the &quot;Best Values in the South&quot; by the U.S. News &amp; World Report annual publication, earning rankings of: No. 1 for &quot;Best master's degree granting public institution in the South&quot;, No. 5 for &quot;All (public and private) master's degree granting colleges and universities in the South&quot;, and No. 7 for &quot;Best value among all institutions in the South&quot;.10
Engineering students are among the most highly-recruited students from The Citadel, and its School of Engineering is ranked 34th among all undergraduate engineering programs in the United States. The civil engineering program is ranked No. 8 in undergraduate engineering specialty programs.11
Newsweek magazine also included The Citadel in its 2006 list of &lt;U+201C&gt;America's 25 Hot Schools&lt;U+201D&gt; as the &lt;U+201C&gt;Hottest Military School&lt;U+201D&gt;.12
Kiplinger's magazine, in its ranking of the &quot;Best Values in Public Colleges&quot; for 2006, made mention of The Citadel as a &quot;great value&quot; although the military nature of its program excluded it from consideration as a &quot;traditional&quot; four-year college in its rankings.13
The Citadel ranks first nationally among its peers for the percentage of students who graduate on time, and Citadel cadets are twice as likely as their peers in other colleges to graduate in four years. The Citadel's top ranking comes from a comparison of all public colleges whose entering students have average SAT scores between 1000 and 1200. The Citadel's four-year graduation rate is 59.7%, and its six-year rate is 71.9%.14
Life as A Cadet
 Undergraduate cadets at The Citadel are members of the South Carolina Corps of Cadets. Cadets must meet physical fitness and SAT/ACT testing standards for acceptance into the Corps of Cadets.15 On occasion, waivers to height/weight standards can be granted upon successful completion of the physical training test. Contracted cadets commonly have both morning and afternoon physical (fitness) training, called &quot;PT&quot;, or military instruction on leadership, called &quot;leadership&quot; or &quot;lead&quot; labs. Non-contracted cadets are required to meet all the same standards as contracted cadets in meeting the requirements for proper drill, discipline, honor, values and respect, ad attending greater issue symposiums. All cadets are required to complete these requirements in addition to their everyday classes.
Most weekdays start with a formal muster and inspection of all personnel and their rooms. Cadets then march to structured military meals. After a day spent in classes, sports and other activities, the day usually ends with an evening muster for fourth-class cadets and mandatory evening study period for all cadets. Cadets are usually allowed to go out on weekends but must sleep overnight in the barracks unless they have been granted special leave by the Commandant's Office.
Because The Citadel emphasizes corps unity and discipline, cadets may not be married and must live on campus in the barracks with their assigned company. The Citadel emphasizes an extremely strict disciplinary and physical fitness indoctrination for first-year cadets, who are called knobs because of the shaved heads they must maintain until the end of their first year when they are then recognized as upperclassmen. In 2010, the Citadel modified the haircut standard to require fourth-class cadets to wear their hair in the style known as &quot;High and Tight.&quot;
Cadets who accumulate too many demerits or breach regulations can be punished by serving confinements or tours. A tour is one hour spent marching in the barracks with a rifle at shoulder arms and is normally performed when a cadet would otherwise be permitted to leave campus. A confinement is one hour spent in a cadet's room in full uniform when they would normally be permitted to leave campus.
First class cadets, those in their senior year, receive their class rings at a special ring presentation ceremony, which was previously held in the college's chapel, but which now takes place in the school's gym. The Citadel ring is 10 karat gold with no gem stone and is one of the heaviest all-precious/semi-precious metal college rings in the United States. The design is common to all cadets and the design does not change with each class with the exception of the class year. Active-duty and evening undergraduate students receive a ring which is the same size, but with a different design.16
Active duty Marine and Navy enlisted personnel attend The Citadel under the Seaman To Admiral program (STA-21)17 and the Marine Enlisted Commissioning Education Program (MECEP).18
The Citadel Regimental Pipe Band is one of the two all-student college pipe bands in the country, and it regularly performs at the weekly parade at The Citadel as well as at other events. The Citadel Regimental Band is the only college band in the world invited to perform at the Royal Edinburg Tattoo in Edinburg, Scotland. &quot;The Citadel Regimental Band and Pipes will be the only U.S. band in Edinburgh, Scotland, for the 2010 Diamond Jubilee of the Royal Edinburgh Military Tattoo, a month-long nightly festival of music, pageantry and demonstrations by military organizations from around the world.&quot;19 The pipe band was started by General Mark Clark in 1955. &quot;Band&quot; company, as is their name inside the Corps of Cadets, is its own separate company composed entirely of musicians.
Athletics
 The Citadel is a NCAA Division I school and a member of the Southern Conference. The college's mascot is the Bulldog. Those cadets who participate in NCAA fall athletics that have camp during the normal cadre (football, woman's soccer and volleyball) are required to report a month earlier prior to their freshman year for &quot;athletic cadre,&quot; so that they can participate in their sport practices when normal cadre starts. During the athletic cadre, the &quot;knob&quot; athletes receive their primary military instruction and fourth-class indoctrination, known as &quot;Hell Week&quot;. Civilian students may only participate in the athletic program as 5th year seniors or graduate school students.
The Citadel Bulldogs baseball team has won thirteen regular season Southern Conference championships, most recently in 2010. The 1990 Citadel baseball team won the Atlantic Regional, earning the school its first trip to the College World Series and finishing the season ranked sixth in the final Collegiate Baseball poll with a record of 46–14. {{-}}
Minority and female students
Charles Foster became the first African-American cadet to graduate from the Citadel in 1970 and he was well known for his success in ROTC.
Norman Seabrooks became the first African American cadet to captain a Football team.
Norman Doucet of the Class of 1994 was the first African American Cadet Regimental Commander of The Citadel.20
The Corps of Cadets at The Citadel was all-male until August 1996, although women had attended civilian graduate and undergraduate evening programs at the school for many years.
On January 20, 1994, Shannon Faulkner became the first female student to enroll in day classes at The Citadel. After additional legal battles, Faulkner won the right to enroll in the residential Corps of Cadets program. She joined an otherwise all-male class on August 15, 1995. However, after only four hours of military indoctrination training, she spent the majority of the first week in the medical infirmary and then voluntarily resigned citing emotional and psychological abuse and physical exhaustion. After her departure, male cadets openly celebrated on the campus.21 Faulkner now works as a middle school teacher at Hughes Academy of Science and Technology in Greenville, South Carolina.
In fall 1996, four more women enrolled at the Citadel. While two dropped out after four months citing harassment, Nancy Mace became the first female cadet to graduate from The Citadel on May 8, 1999. Using credits earned from a two-year community college, Mace graduated in three years. Mace's father, Brigadier General Emory Mace, became the Commandant of Cadets during her second semester at The Citadel.
The first international female cadet was Czech-born Petra Lovetinska-Seipel, who graduated May 2000. Lovetinska holds the rank of captain in the U.S. Marine Corps and served in the Iraq War. She is married to a fellow Marine officer, Captain Patrick Seipel.
The first African-American woman graduated on May 11, 2002. The Citadel, like the United States military, has adopted gender norming for physical fitness tests.
Campus
 The Citadel sits on a  tract of land on the Ashley River. There are 27 buildings grouped around a  grass parade ground. The buildings around the parade ground include ten classroom buildings, an administrative building, five barracks, a student activities building, infirmary, chapel, stadium, a yacht club, a marksmanship center, a field house, and library. The campus is bounded on the west by the Ashley River, to the north by the Wagener Terrace neighborhood, and to the east by Hampton Park and the Hampton Park Terrace neighborhood. Just off the main campus are the football stadium, baseball stadium, and alumni center. Additionally, there is a large beach house facility located near the north end of the Isle of Palms.
The Citadel Graduate College
The Citadel&lt;U+2019&gt;s evening graduate program serves the Lowcountry by offering regionally and professionally accredited bachelors, masters and specialist degrees scheduled around the student&lt;U+2019&gt;s profession, family and lifestyle. CGC offers 19 graduate programs with concentrations in education, psychology, computer science and business.22 The Masters of Business Administration program is the only nationally accredited MBA program in the Low Country region of South Carolina. CGC also offers undergraduate evening programs in business and engineering. The Citadel is also the only college in South Carolina that offers an undergraduate civil and electrical engineering degree in an evening program.
Core values
In its Vision Statement, the Citadel Board of Visitors identifies the following as the school's &quot;core values:&quot;


Academics: We produce graduates who have insight into the issues, ideas and values that are important to society and possess the skills necessary to deal with them successfully.


Duty: We emphasize the importance of individual accountability and the moral obligation of responsibility for the welfare of others.


Honor: We adhere to a code which teaches that uncompromising personal integrity is the primary guide in all situations. &quot;A cadet does not lie, cheat, or steal, nor tolerate those that do.&quot;


Morality: We believe that an individual's character is of utmost importance and, therefore, we provide training which emphasizes ethical principles and core values.


Discipline: We operate a leadership laboratory which emphasizes a structured environment, acceptance of responsibility, self-confidence and service to others.


Diversity: We promote diversity in all segments of our campus community and college life.


No lock tradition
Since its founding, male cadets at the Citadel have not had locks on their barracks doors. Every cadet has a lockbox, however, that can be used to house valuables. The tradition had evolved in keeping with the spareness of military life and with the school's honor code, which mandates that cadets do not steal. Since 1997, female cadets have been able to lock their doors from the inside. In 2007, all barracks doors were fitted with working locks.23 As of 2009 all knobs are required to lock their rooms after Taps. 
Enrollment and Tuition
 Approximately half of Citadel's enrollment is from the state of South Carolina.24 The Citadel has graduated students from across the U.S. and from many other countries. South Carolina residents receive a discount in tuition, as is common at state-sponsored schools, although The Citadel receives only about 10% of its budget from the state.25 Total first year expenses (tuition, fees, uniforms, housing, meals, etc..) for the 2009-2010 academic year were $21,994 for South Carolina residents and $35,804 for all others.26 {{-}}
Military service
All cadets are required to undergo four years of ROTC training in one of the four branches of the armed services, but they are not required to enter military service after graduation. Non-contracted students are also required to undergo four years of ROTC. Currently, just over forty percent of graduates go into military service, and less than ten percent make the military a career. The others go on to graduate, law, or medical school programs or enter the civilian workforce. Over 260 Citadel alumni have reached the top ranks in the military by becoming flag officers (generals, rear admirals or commodores)27. Alumni of the Citadel have served their country in all wars involving the United States since the school's establishment. Citadel alumni have been killed in action during the Mexican War (6), Civil War (67), World War I (15), World War II (280), Korean War (32), Vietnam War (68), Lebanon (1), Grenada (1), the Gulf War (1), and the current conflicts in Iraq and Afghanistan (14).28 Alumni also serve in other countries, including five four-star generals in the Royal Thai Army.29
Summer camp
&quot;The Citadel Summer Camp&quot;, a summer camp for boys and girls ages 10 to 15, was held at The Citadel every summer from 1957 until 2006. Founded by General Mark Wayne Clark, its purpose was to develop and strengthen the physical, mental, ethical, spiritual, patriotic and social characteristics of campers.30 The Citadel Summer Camp ceased operation in 2006 because of financial issues, space limitations and pressure from several pending lawsuits.31
Cadet Officer Leadership School
Selected members of Air Force JROTC units from the Southeastern United States cadets are eligible to spend a week at the Citadel for officer training for their home JROTC units. A routine day attending Cadet Officer Leadership School (COLS) begins with waking up to Reveille for morning PT. This includes aerobic stretches, push ups, sit ups, and then a mile run. The remainder of the day is uniform wear and inspection, two classes and constant regulation drill. On the day of graduation from the school, cadets participate in a &quot;pass in review&quot; ceremony where awards and decorations are given to certain cadets who have gone above the normal standards. A PT ribbon and a Leadership School ribbon are given to all cadets who graduate from COLS back at their home unit. A Leadership ribbon is given to all Cadre, or cadet leaders, who graduate from the program, also back at their home unit at the beginning of the school year. Units that have a 100% PT(physical training) pass rate also receive a Colonel Sercer award, which includes a plaque and a certificate for the unit to display wherever they see fit.
Notable graduates

Fictional depictions

Pat Conroy's 1980 novel The Lords of Discipline was based in part on Conroy's experience as a cadet at The Citadel during the 1960s and on his research of other military schools. This book is a fictitious account of the first African American cadet at The Citadel and the class struggle that ensued to both keep and reject the cadet. The novel outraged many of his fellow graduates of The Citadel, who felt that the book was a thinly veiled portrayal of campus life that was highly unflattering. The rift was not healed until 2000, when Conroy was awarded an honorary degree and asked to deliver the commencement address the following year. That year Conroy spearheaded fundraising to renovate the banquet hall in the old armory, now occupied by The Citadel Alumni Association. The Lords of Discipline was made into a movie of the same name starring David Keith and Robert Prosky in 1983.
Sword Drill, a novel by David Epps (Citadel Class of 1980), presents a fictional version of the Citadel&lt;U+2019&gt;s now disbanded Junior Sword Drill program.1
A thinly veiled depiction of the Citadel provides the background for Calder Willingham's novel End as a Man and the film adaptation, The Strange One.
The Citadel was used as the location for shooting the episode Columbo episode &quot;By Dawn's Early Light,&quot; guest starring Patrick McGoohan.
Major Ben Marco, Denzel Washington's character in the movie The Manchurian Candidate, was a graduate of the Citadel.
In the film For the Boys, Bette Midler's son graduates as Regimental Commander of the Corps of Cadets. His commencement speech is filmed in front of 2nd Battalion Barracks.
Several scenes of the movie Dear John were filmed at The Citadel.

References


External links

Official Website







nl:The Citadel (militaire academie) no:The Military College of South Carolina pl:The Citadel
Category:Educational institutions established in 1842 Category:Military education and training in the United States   Citadel Citadel Citadel Citadel Citadel Citadel



Quick Facts from the Citadel web site.↩
America's Best Colleges 2008: The Citadel USNews.com↩
Citadel reinstates veterans program The Citadel Public Affairs Office↩
John P. Thomas, History of the South Carolina Military Academy 1783-1892(Charleston, SC, Walker, Evans &amp; Cogswell Co., 1893)p.5-6↩
Oliver J. Bond, The Story of The Citadel (Richmond, VA, Garrett and Massie) pp 168-170↩
Andrew D. Kullberg, First To Fight: Citadel Cadets, The Star of the West, and Fort Sumter(Austin, TX, Citadel Historical Society, 2010)p.23-31↩
↩
↩
Classes that did not graduate The Citadel website.↩
America's Best Colleges 2009, U.S. News &amp; World Report web site.↩
The Citadel remains top ranked by U.S.News for both quality, value The Citadel website.↩
America's 25 Hot Schools, Newsweek, 2006.↩
Lankford, Kimberly (2006). Best Values in Public Colleges. Kiplinger's.↩
Graduation rates Citadel Press Release.↩
Admissions policy The Citadel website.↩
The Ring The Buoniconti Fund website.↩
http://www.citadel.edu/nrotc/Navy/New/Sta21.html↩
http://www.citadel.edu/nrotc/Marines/MECEP/MECEP.htm↩
http://http://externalaffairs.citadel.edu/Band_invited_to_Scotland_Tattoo↩
Citadel names 1st Black student as commander findarticles.com↩
Case Study Harvard Law, harvard.edu↩
In 2007 The Citadel changed its graduate program's name from the College of Graduate and Professional Studies (CGPS) to The Citadel Graduate College (CGC).↩
↩
↩
As of 2010, ↩
↩
↩


The Citadel Summer Camp↩
http://www.citadel.edu/pao/newsreleases/sy03-04/lawsuit.htm↩


