Kalpana was a very popular Kannada cinema actress. Her epithet was Minugu taare (&quot;shining star&quot;). A versatile actress, she dominated the Kannada film industry during the late 1960s and 1970s and was critically acclaimed for her roles in movies like Sharapanjara, Gejje Pooje, Belli moda, Eradu Kanasu, Kappu Bilupu, bayalu dari and Bangarada hoovu.Initially she was the favored heroine of ace director Puttana Kanagal. Their association produced some of the finest movies in the history of kannada cinema.However they fell apart and Puttana Kanagal went on to groom other heroines like Aarthi and Padma Vasanti later on.
Kalpana hailed from South Canara district. Before films her name was Sharat Lata. Her mothertongue was Tulu.
She had also acted in a few Tamil movies, like 'Madras To Pondicherry'. This film was later made in Hindi, starring Amitabh Bachchan and Aruna Irani in leading roles. Both the films were very successful at the box office. She also acted in 'Koti Channayya', a Tulu movie, directed by Dr K Shivarama Karanth.
She was the one of the well dressed star of her time. Not many heroines till date can match her elegance and her sophisticated tastes. The popularity of mega-sleeves blouses, frilled-sleeve blouses is attributed to her in Karnataka. Her signature combinations include big ear-rings and big ring in her left hand, Brocade silk sarees and top knot, Chiffon sarees and long necklaces.
Her career ended with her tragic suicide in 1979; in gotur IB , near sankeshwar , belgaum distrcit on NH4 road to kolhapur , apparently emulating her role in Gejje Pooje and swallowing a diamond, heart broken by a man who was supposed to marry her.1
Partial filmography



Partial Filmography




Film


Saaku Magalu


Uyyale


Naandi


Sree Kannika Parameshwari Kathe


Belli Moda


Padavidhara


Immadi Pullakeshi


Dhanapishachi


Bangarada Hoovu


Hoovu Mullu


Anna Thamma


Mannina Maga


Ananda kanda


Gandhinagara


Hannele Chiguridaga


Kaanike


Kappu Bilupu


Gejje Pooje


Brindavan


Anirishita


Karulina Kare


Sharapanjara


Sothu Geddavalu


Yeradu Kanasu


Daari Tappida Maga


Bayalu Daari


Malaya Makkalu






2
References



Category:Place of birth missing Category:Kannada film actors Category:Living people Category:1979 deaths Category:Suicides in India



The Hindu : To live and die for him↩
KALPANA: Film Database - CITWF↩


