


Rossall School



Rossall Crest



Motto


Established


School type


Headmaster


Deputy Headmaster


Location


Enrollment


Faculty


Founder


Colours


Homepage



Rossall School is a British, co-educational, independent, day and boarding school in Fleetwood, Lancashire. It was founded in 1844 by The Rev. St Vincent Beechey as a sister school to Marlborough College which had been founded the previous year. Its establishment was &quot;with the object of giving to the sons of clergymen and others an education similar to that of the great public schools, but without the great cost of Eton or Harrow, and embracing also a more general course of instruction in modern literature and science.&quot;) Set in an 160 acre estate next to Rossall Beach, Rossall is also a member of the Headmasters' and Headmistresses' Conference and was granted a royal charter in 1890.1
School Life
The daily timetable consists of 6 one hour schools (periods) a day: with a break between schools 2 &amp; 3 and lunch after school 3. Tea is also offered to boarders. Lessons are from Monday to Friday and Saturday morning. Every year the school's students in the sixth form can become chosen as school monitors. It offers both A-levels and the International Baccalaureate Diploma to its Sixth form students.
The CCF
Rossall is noted for being the first school in the United Kingdom to form a Combined Cadet Force (CCF),2 being founded in 1859 with the threat of a French/Irish Catholic invasion at its height. The institution is still present in the school today with around 100 cadets currently enlisted. In recent years the shooting team has excelled with notable victories in the Home Guard Cup and Loyal&lt;U+2019&gt;s Regimental Cup. 
The Carmen
The Rossall School song, The Carmen was composed by Dr. C.H.Lloyd, later organist at Gloucester Cathedral and Christ Church College and then Director of Music at Eton. It is sung at major school events including Old Rossallian dinners and end of term assemblies. Tradition has it that when singing it one must stand up on a bench/chair and belt it out with appropriate gusto. Usually only the first verse is sung, however there are 3 full verses. The full lyrics:
Concinamus admirantes
Propter fluctus asstuantes
Stantem te, Rossallia!
Alma mater, te bibamus,
Tui calices proscamus!
Hanc sententium decamus,
Floreat Rossallia! 
Adsint chroro gratulanti,
Adsint choro Di pricanti!
Te juvent, Rossallia!
Auferamus post labores
E honores!
Tui manent hinc amores
Latius, Rossallia!

Ornet inconcussa virtus,
Rara Fides, honor certus;
Te colant, Rossallia!
Hinc per saecla saeculorum
Fama crescat; vox tuorum
Una surgat filiorum,
Floreat Rossallia!
Houses
Like many independent schools Rossall adopted a house system early on, with each pupil belonging to a house. It forms an integral part of life at the school and there are frequent inter-house events in sports as well as the arts. The current houses are: 



House Name
Student's Gender
Part of:
Houseparent
Colours
House Type




Anchor
Boys + Girls
Middle School
Mr. &amp; Mrs. C. Parsons
Red and Blue
Boarding


Dolphin (merged with Dragon Cresent)
Girls
Senior School
Mrs. A. Jurczak
Black and Yellow
Day


Falcon
Boys + Girls
Middle School
Mrs L. Furniss
Gold and Blue
Day


Lugard Boys
Boys
ISC
Mr. I. Moore
Red and Black
Boarding


Lugard Girls
Girls
ISC

Red and Black
Boarding


Maltese Cross
Boys
Senior School

Sky Blue and Grey
Boarding + Day


Mitre Fleur-de-Lys
Boys
Senior School
Mr. S. Corrie
Magenta, Yellow and Black
Boarding + Day


Pelican
Boys
Senior School
Mr. J. Riding
Salmon and Black
Boarding + Day


Rose
Girls
Senior School
Mrs. K. Griffiths
Green and Black
Boarding


Spread Eagle
Boys
Senior School
Mr. I. McCleary
Black and White/Silver
Boarding + Day


Stag's Head
Boys + Girls
Middle School
Mrs J. Cross
Gold and Red
Day



Brief History of Rossall
 Having been founded in 1844, on land that had historically belonged to the Allen Family, Rossall nearly shut down within a few years due to huge outbreaks of Scarlet Fever - not unusual for boarding schools of the time. In the 1860s a new school chapel had to be built to cope the increasing number of students, the old chapel serving, as it does today, as the school library. The school underwent futher development from 1880s to 1900 to accomodate more students and to create further facilities such as the gym which still stands. By the end of Queen Victoria's reign Rossall was widely considered to be in top 30 public schools in the UK 3 also earning itself a place in the Public Schools Yearbook.
During the world wars large numbers of Old Rossallians lost their lives in combat - the majority of whom are now comemmorated in the extension memorial chapel. During the Second World War Rossall also accomodated Alleyn's School who had to be evacuated from London as a result of the risk of bombing. The school continued to succeed and in the 1970s, in a bid to ensure the highest standards, during a period of declining boarding, girls were allowed to enroll.
Throughout the 1980s the school continued to prosper, though going through great financial difficulty at the turn of the millenium. Rossall has since had a large amount of investment, with the boarding houses currently undergoing refurbishment and large restructuring throughout the years. The middle school now runs from years 7 to 9, one year longer than traditionally. As a part of the modernising of the school the IB was introduced as an alternative to A-Levels towards the end of the 1990s, being only the 3rd school in the UK to do so, and there is now also a large international boarding contingent.
Rossall is still comitted to relatively affordable private education in relation to the rest of the UK - 80% of those who attend the school are the first in their family to attend and independent school4 and a large number of scholarships and bursaries are available. 2007 sees the return of the Rossall Summer School - developed to give children from outside of the UK the opportunity to develop their English speaking skills as well as being a chance for those thinking of going to a boarding school to prepare for the change in daily lifestyle.
Fees (Per Term)
Senior School

Day - &lt;U+00A3&gt;2,855.00
Extended Day - &lt;U+00A3&gt;3,565.00
IB Day - &lt;U+00A3&gt;3,185.00
Boarding - &lt;U+00A3&gt;7,270.00
IB Boarding - &lt;U+00A3&gt;7,995.00

Middle School

Day - &lt;U+00A3&gt;2,600.00
Extended Day - &lt;U+00A3&gt;3,565.00
Boarding - &lt;U+00A3&gt;4,995.00

Lawrence House Astronomy &amp; Space Science Centre
 Rossall is also home to the Lawrence House Astronomy &amp; Space Science Centre - the only centre dedicated solely to the teaching of Astronomy5. The project consists of the 9 foot Victorian Telescope in Rossall's Assheton Observatory as well as a building of its own containing a lecture theatre, classrooms and a portable planetarium.
The project has been funded by the Lawrence House Trust and predominantly run by Dr. Nick Lister, originally the head of D.T. at the school and now Astronomer in Residence. When initial assessments were being made for the feasability of restoring the observatory, both the telescope and observatory were in a poor condition, having notably been victim to an attempt to burn it down by some local children. However, the telescope is made predominantly from brass and thus suffered minimal corrosion. Similarly the lens of the telescope, despite 30 years of neglect, survived unscathed allowing for restoration. This was carried out at first by several dedicated parents and governors of the school, amongst them Syd Little.
Soon after the basic restoration ideas were raised for a larger project allowing the teaching of astronomy on a larger scale. After getting clearance from the original owners of the telescope to go ahead with the project, Rossall was given funds from the Lawrence House Trust, an educational charity, to go forward with their plans.
The centre had an official opening on Tuesday 26th September 2006 with Old Rossallian and former Astronomer Royal Sir Francis Graham Smith in attendence. The centre's motto is 'Astronomy For All' meaning that it offers courses to Rossall Students but also at a small cost to the general public. Courses also range from beginner to advanced to ensure that anybody who wishes to study Astronomy can do so.
Some Rossallian Jargon

The Museum Theatre


Big School - The Main Assembly Hall
Chagger - The nickname for the houses changing rooms.
Common Room - The name of the Teachers Lounge. Teachers are known as members of Common Room.
Moni's Lawn - The elevated area of grass next to the dining hall on which only school monitors can walk
Nagger - The nickname for the Matron's office where laundry is cleaned etc.
Rossall Fives - Rossall's unique version of fives - an amalgamation of Rugby, Winchester and Eton Fives - though it resembles Rugby Fives more than the other two codes.
Rossall Hockey - A relatively famous6 game unique to Rossall - a cross between Rugby and Hockey played on the beach in the harshest winter months.
Rosshop - Rossall's own shop which sells the school's uniform, sports equipment etc.

Old Rossallians
{{ main|Notable Old Rossallians }} Many notable people have studied at Rossall over the years.

Bill Ashton - Founder of the National Youth Jazz Orchestra
Sir Thomas Beecham - Conductor and founder of numerous orchestras including the London Philharmonic.


Rossall International Study Centre, formerly the largest Headmaster's House in the UK


David Brown - Aston Martin and Lagonda owner.
Father Thomas R.D. Byles - Catholic priest who refused to leave the Titanic so he could help fellow passengers. He perished as it sank.
Leslie Charteris - author and creator of The Saint
Michael Dickinson - World Record Holding National Hunt trainer
J.G. Farrell - novelist and winner of the Booker Prize
Wilfred Fletcher C.B.E - Designer of the first Severn Bridge and the Tamar Bridge
F. W. Harvey - Poet
Lord Frederick Lugard - Govenor of Nigeria and Hong Kong, also founder of the University of Hong Kong
Charles Kay Ogden - Linguist, psychologist, philosopher and inventor of Basic English
Brian Redman - Successful racing car driver - 3 times Formula 5000 champion amongst other notable victories
Walter Clopton Wingfield - The Inventor of Lawn Tennis
Peter Winterbottom - Former England Rugby Union Captain. He also played for the Lions.

The school alumni society is called the Rossallian Club. The Rossallian Club has numerous gatherings every year all over the UK and, with the advent of a large international boarding contingent in recent years, all over the world - the first ever OR meal in Germany took place in 2006. The school also has its own masonic lodge, founded in 1928, that meets three times a year at Freemasons's Hall in London. It is part of the Public School Lodges Council and is open to any Old Rossallian who wishes to join.7
Odd Yet True Rossall Anecdotes

In 1911 the Rossall Bursar, Major Anstead (A very peculiar chap who was always seen riding a horse in full military uniform.), was found to be attempting to enlist in London for military service in South Africa. The Rossallian who spotted him informed the police. Simultaneously Rossall was nearly forced to file for bankruptcy. After investigation it turned out that Major Anstead had been tampering with the books and had embezzled over &lt;U+00A3&gt;70,000, equivalent to more than &lt;U+00A3&gt;1million today. He had used the money to finance his extravagant lifestyle, uniforms and an expensive mistress in London. 8
The original school dining hall burnt down in the 1920s. The replacement, the current dining hall, was built the wrong way around. Not only was it built the wrong way around, it was constructed from bricks encased in a weatherable coating that would dissolve away to leave it looking in the same condition as the rest of the square. Unfortunately, despite the best efforts of the north Lancashire climate and the Irish Sea, the bricks have yet to fully weather, or in most cases weather in any way at all. Hence its peculiar colour compared with the rest of the Rossall buildings.
In the early 20th century one particularly unpopular school chaplain, Revd. Sleep, was subject to an assassination attempt from the students. Arsenic in the sugar was the means chosen by the students to rid the school of the hated priest. However, the plot was outed before any of the affected sugar was consumed. 9

Gallery

Click any image to see it full-size

Image:RossallGazebo.jpg|The Gazebo Image:RossallSchoolChapel.jpg|Rossall School Chapel, Monitors' Lawn and Beecham Music Schools Image:RossallDrive.jpg|Rossall School Main Drive as viewed from the archway Image:RossallLibrary1.jpg|Rossall School Libray Image:Rossall.jpg|Rossall School Panorama Image:PrepSchool.jpg|Rossall Prep School Image:RossallArchway2.jpg|Rossall School Archway Image:RossallFromTheAir2.jpg|Another Ariel Shot of Rossall with Blackpool in the background



References

External and other links

Official site
Old Rossallian Club Website
Lawrence House Astronomy and Space Science Centre Website
Rossall Summer School Website

Category:Anglican schools Category:Boarding schools in England Category:Educational institutions established in 1844 Category:Grade II listed buildings in Lancashire Category:International Baccalaureate schools Category:Members of the Headmasters' and Headmistresses' Conference Category:Public schools in Lancashire Category:Schools in Fylde Category:Schools with Combined Cadet Forces



&quot;The Rossall Register 1844-1894&quot; - Available on DVD-ROM from Anguline Research Archives↩

http://www.jstor.org/view/03617882/ap010047/01a00050/5?frame=noframe&amp;userID=9052d092@ucl.ac.uk/01cce4405d00501bec9d0&amp;dpi=3&amp;config=jstor↩
http://www.rossallianclub.co.uk/uploads/pubdownloads/newsletter12-04.pdf↩
↩
http://www.newstatesman.com/200010090007↩
http://www.rossallianclub.co.uk/about/default.asp↩
&quot;Rossall Will Be What You Make It&quot; - Peter Bennett (1992) - Published by Rossall Archives↩



