



Television Broadcasts Limited (,), commonly known as TVB, was the first over-the-air commercial television station in Hong Kong. It commenced broadcasting on 19 November 1967.1. With a staff of about 4,500, it is one of two free-to-air television broadcasters in Hong Kong, the other being its arch-rival, ATV.2
TVB is the first free-to-air (FTA) television broadcaster in Hong Kong. When TVB first began broadcasting, to distinguish it from the cable television broadcaster, Rediffusion Television, it was commonly known as &quot;Wireless Television&quot; ( Cantonese: mo sin din si) in Chinese, although there is more than one terrestrial television station now. The company's current chairman is Sir Run Run Shaw.3
TVB currently operates five free channels in Hong Kong.TVB Jade (Cantonese) and TVB Pearl (English) are TVB's flagship television channels. Under the digital terrestrial television platform, which formally commenced on 31 December 2007, J2 and iNEWS are new channels launched with standard definition, while HD Jade is Hong Kong's One-and-Only 24-hour broadcasting channel in high definition. 45 TVB currently provides twelve pay-tv channels for its associated company, TVB Pay Vision Limited.
TVB reaches out to the overseas Chinese communities. Its productions are available in Mainland China, Taiwan, Macau, the United States, United Kingdom, Canada, Australia, Republic of Ireland, New Zealand, Thailand, Malaysia, and Singapore, among others, on channels such as TVB's own TVBS-Europe1 subscription satellite service.6 In Taiwan, TVB operates through its TVBS subsidiary.
Many of Hong Kong's film and pop stars started their careers at the station through drama series produced by TVB. Special TVB events such as the annual TVB Anniversary Celebration are broadcast to planetary audience. TVB also runs talent programmes such as the annual Miss Hong Kong and Miss Chinese International beauty pageants. Successful contestants may be offered TVB's contracts and represent Hong Kong to take part at world-class beauty contests, including the Miss World Pageant.
Development
TVB dominates most of the television market in Hong Kong, but it is not considered the powerhouse it used to be. It started in 1965 as a competitor to what was then called Rediffusion Television, later to become ATV, a cable operator that charged subscription fees for its operation, and the only terrestrial competitor to TVB One of the first show launched was Enjoy Yourself Tonight in 1967.
TVB receives praise for its programming from a wide range of demographics, including the middle class, as was the case with its 2004 historical drama series War and Beauty. Its programme line-up features a steady stream of soap operas, variety shows and other populist fare.
TVB has been criticised for signing exclusive contracts with many local celebrities which restrict them from appearing on other local television stations. Hong Kong's Cable T.V. claims it is unfair competition (although Asia Television Ltd, another major television station in Hong Kong, disagrees). In fact, many artists do not have exclusive contracts with TVB and are free to show up in programmes produced by other local television stations or out-sourcing production houses.
The annual TVB Music Awards ceremony is one of the biggest for Cantopop personalities. It is widely rumoured that TVB distributes the awards to those who are obedient to the company's demands, and the Independent Commission Against Corruption (Hong Kong) has investigated the arrangement of the awards.7 It ruled that three TVB staff members under scrutiny were not guilty. Afterwards, TVB reformed its music programmes in a bid to reestablish their authority.8
On the other hand, TVB was awarded the National Association of Broadcasters's (NAB) International Broadcasting Excellence Award in 2001. The award recognised the company's outstanding contributions to the community through a wide range of charitable programmes and activities. Hong Kong thus becomes the first city in Asia to receive this prestigious award in this area.910
In 2005, TVB, in association with the Hong Kong Jockey Club, organised the biggest fundraising campaign in the company's history in response to South-East Asia's recent tsunami. It raised over one hundred million Hong Kong dollars to assist those affected.
From 31 March 2008, TVBS-Europe launched their &quot;Multi-channel&quot; package in Europe. It consists of 5 different channels which include the existing TVBS-Europe Channel plus the addition of TVBN, TVB Entertainment News, TVB Classic and TVB Lifestyle.11
Location
  TVB was originally located on Broadcast Drive in Kowloon Tong, and was neighbours with RTHK and ATV. By the late 1980s, the company had out-grown the facility at Broadcast Drive, and built a new studio complex, named T.V. City, at 220 Clear Water Bay Road in 1986.12 The first TVB City was in fact the old Shaw Movie Town complex used by Shaw Brothers since 1958. The old Broadcast Drive headquarters was later converted into apartments. The first TVB City is now used by Celestial Pictures.
To cope with future development and expansion, TVB began planning in 1998 to develop a replacement facility at the Tseung Kwan O Industrial Estate. The new HK$2.2 billion TVB City came into full operation in October 2003. The new headquarters are built on by far the largest piece of land ever leased by the then Hong Kong Industrial Estates Corporation and the first service-providing company in the area. It has a building area of over 110,000 square metres, 30% more than that of the previous facilities at Clear Water Bay. Studio 1 in TVB City, which can seat an audience of six hundred and thirty, is the largest television production studio among commercial television stations in Asia.13
News operation

TVB broadcasts several news programmes, such as Jade Prime News (Jade) and Pearl Headline Prime (Pearl). It also operates its own news channel, TVBN. () and TVBN2 (), through TVB Pay Vision ().
Management

Sir Run Run Shaw () G.B.M. (Executive Chairman)
Mona Fong () (Deputy Chairwoman and Acting Managing Directress)
Stephen Chan Chi Wan () General Manager
Virginia Lok Artiste Management Executive()

Notable shows from TVB


TVB is a major television-producer in Hong Kong, and its programmes usually receive greater ratings than offerings from the other local television stations.

Enjoy Yourself Tonight (1967–1994), one of the world's longest-running live variety shows. It's popularity is comparative to United States's Saturday Night Live.
The Bund (1980), starring Chow Yun-fat. It is regarded by many as one of the best TVB dramas due to inspirational storyline and music. The drama was a success throughout Asia, which inspired several serial adaptations, including TVB's own 1996 adaptation (starring Sunny Chan) and a 2007 Mainland China adaptation (starring Huang Xiaoming).
The Legend of the Condor Heroes (1982), a serial adaptation of Louis Cha's wuxia novel of the same name, starring Felix Wong and Barbara Yung.
Return of the Condor Heroes (1983), the sequel to Legend of the Condor Heroes, is a serial adaptation of Louis Cha's wuxia novel of the same name, starring Andy Lau and Idy Chan.
Looking Back in Anger (1989), is a tragic serial drama starring Felix Wong, Deric Wan, and Carina Lau. It remains to be one of the most watched TVB drama to date.
The Greed of Man (1992), starring Adam Cheng, heavily impacted international stock brokers, and created the phenomenon known as the Ding Hai effect.
The File of Justice series (1992–1997) were a popular legal drama series, spanning to five seasons. It is commonly known as the Hong Kong version of America's Law &amp; Order.
Cold Blood Warm Heart (1995), a popular romantic serial drama starring Gallen Lo, Julian Cheung, Nnadia Chan, and Jessica Hsuan.
A Kindred Spirit (1995–1999), the second longest-running sitcom in Hong Kong television history.
Super Trio Series (1995–present), a popular variety game show.
The Detective Investigation Files series (1995–1999) were a popular crime drama series about detectives in Hong Kong, spanning to three seasons and one spin-off season. Louis Koo and Jessica Hsuan won their first &quot;Best Actor&quot; and &quot;Best Actress&quot; award respectively in 1999 for their roles in the fourth season.
Journey to the West (1996) was one of the few TVB Jade programmes to be dubbed in English and rebroadcast on TVB Pearl.
Old Time Buddy (1997), a comedy-drama that satires Hong Kong's filming industry in the 1960s. The drama won &quot;Best Drama&quot; at the annual TVB Anniversary Awards, also yielding Gallen Lo's first win for &quot;Best Actor.&quot;
The Untraceable Evidence series (1997) were a popular crime drama series about forensic science. It is commonly known as the Hong Kong version of America's CSI.
Secret of the Heart (1998), a popular serial drama famous for its dramatized triangle relationships. It yielded Gallen Lo's second win for &quot;Best Actor&quot;, Ada Choi for &quot;Best Actress&quot;, and Nick Cheung for &quot;Most Improved Actor.&quot;
The Armed Reaction series (1998–2004) were a popular crime drama series dealing with discrimination women face within the police force. The drama spanned four seasons.
The Healing Hands series (1998–2005) were a popular medical drama series known for its remarkable medical accuracy. It is commonly known as Hong Kong's version of America's ER. The first season yielded &quot;Best Drama&quot; award in 1998.
At the Threshold of an Era (1999–2000) is an epic drama featuring a large ensemble cast. It is TVB's most expensive drama to date.
War of the Genders (2000), a sitcom starring Carol Cheng and Dayo Wong, is generally considered as TVB's most critically acclaimed sitcom. It held the title as TVB's highest-rated drama (49 viewership points) until the broadcast of Korea's Jewel in the Palace, which broke to 50. It yielded Cheng to win &quot;Best Actress&quot; and Wong to win &quot;My Favorite Male Character.&quot;
Virtues of Harmony (2001–2005) is one of the longest running sitcoms in Hong Kong, yielding two seasons – a historical costume series with a modern-day spin-off.
A Step into the Past (2001), a serial adaptation of Huang Yi's wuxia novel The Chronicles of Finding Qin, starring Louis Koo. The drama yielded Koo's second win for &quot;Best Actor.&quot;
Square Pegs (2003), a drama serial starring Roger Kwok, depicts the life of a mentally-retarded young man. It yielded Kwok's win for &quot;Best Actor&quot;. A modern spin-off drama was released in 2005, which Kwok won the &quot;Best Actor&quot; award again for the second time.
War and Beauty (2004), a costume drama serial depicting the lives of four concubines and their psychological torments with each other to strive to the top. It yielded Gigi Lai and Bowie Lam's win for &quot;Best Actress&quot; and &quot;Best Actor&quot; respectively; Sheren Tang for &quot;Best Supporting Actress&quot; and 2004's &quot;Best Drama.&quot;
Heart of Greed (2007), a popular drama serial that achieved the &quot;Best Drama&quot; award of 2007. It yielded Moses Chan's first win for &quot;Best Actor&quot;, Louise Lee for &quot;Best Actress&quot;, and Louis Yuen for &quot;Best Supporting Actor.&quot;
Moonlight Resonance (2008), the sister production of Heart of Greed. While it was critically less successful than the former, the drama is the highest-rated TVB production ever produced, yielding the &quot;Best Drama&quot; award of 2008. It yielded Ha Yu's first win for &quot;Best Actor&quot;, Michelle Yim for &quot;Best Actress,&quot; and Tavia Yeung for &quot;Best Supporting Actress.&quot;
E.U. (2009), the third season of The Academy series, was widely popular in part due to Michael Tse's character, Laughing Gor. His character inspired a spin-off film, Turning Point (2009), starring Tse, Anthony Wong, and Francis Ng.
Rosy Business (2009), award-winning costume drama starring Sheren Tang and Wayne Lai. It yielded Tang the &quot;Best Actress&quot; award and Lai with three awards (Best Actor, My Favorite Male Character, tvb.com's Popular Artist).
Beyond the Realm of Conscience (2009), a grand TVB production drama loosely inspired by popular Korean drama [Jewel in the Palace] which was broadcast in Hong Kong in 2005. The Story going with the two friends like sisters who then became enemies, lied in the conflicting around the palace during the latter years of Tang Dynasty. Along with Widely-acclaimed by critics for its elaborate costumes and gripping plot, the series became the one of highest rating TVB Drama, praised the popularity of First Villian role of Tavia Yeung as Yiu Gam Ling. It then led her to win two awards in one night such as &quot;My Favourite Female Character&quot; and &quot;Best Outstanding Performance&quot; for the series.

Criticism
In 2009, TVB drew criticism on internet forums when its news department lightly dabbed the issue on 4th June Incident during the 20th Anniversary of the event. This was seen as a deliberate act to gain the favor of the Chinese Central Government, and to make their programming more acceptable by Chinese censors. Many mocked TVB that it had become &quot;CCTVB&quot;. TVB is also criticised for not reporting news that may harm their own interests, such as the mid-term review of both aTV's and TVB's broadcast licensing.
The standard of TVB's entertainment programmes, from soap operas to games shows, have also been criticised to be of reducing quality. Soap operas reflect less and less of the lives of the average Hong Kong citizen, and game shows are said to resort to the use of bad language and borderline eroticism, wastage of food and resources, and polluting the minds and children and adolescents.
TVB has also been criticised for being a copycat, copying many elements from the more successful shows on aTV, sometimes even copying the entire format of a show, such as Hong Kong Today, with which TVB made Focus on Focus.
Channel list

TVB Jade
TVB Pearl
TVB J2
TVB iNews
TVB HD Jade

See also

List of Hong Kong companies
List of Chinese companies
Asia Television Ltd - rival broadcaster
TVB News

References

External links

TVB Official Site 



es:Television Broadcasts Limited ko:TVB id:Television Broadcasts Limited ms:Television Broadcasts Limited nl:TVB (televisie) ja:&lt;U+7121&gt;&lt;U+7DAB&gt;&lt;U+96FB&gt;&lt;U+8996&gt; pt:Television Broadcasts Limited zh-yue:&lt;U+7121&gt;&lt;U+7DAB&gt;&lt;U+96FB&gt;&lt;U+8996&gt; zh:&lt;U+96FB&gt;&lt;U+8996&gt;&lt;U+5EE3&gt;&lt;U+64AD&gt;&lt;U+6709&gt;&lt;U+9650&gt;&lt;U+516C&gt;&lt;U+53F8&gt;
Category:Companies of Hong Kong Category:Hong Kong media Category:Hong Kong television   Category:Former Hang Seng Index Constituent Stocks Category:Companies established in 1967 Category:Television stations in China



The company registed on 26 July 1965 C.R. No:0011781&lt;U+FF08&gt;Television Broadcasts Limited&lt;U+FF09&gt;&lt;U+2014&gt;The Cyber Search Centre of the Integrated Companies Registry Information System↩
↩

↩
↩
↩
↩
↩

↩
Chinese Channel Home Page↩
[ShawMovieTown Shaw Brothers History]↩
↩


