
A man hands out advertising tissues to passersby in Tokyo.

Tissue-pack marketing is a type of guerrilla marketing that is a phenomenon in Japan. Japanese companies use tissues to move advertising copy directly into consumers' hands. About 4 billion packages of tissues are distributed on the streets annually in Japan - largely outside of subway stations.1 This industry generates sales in the range of &lt;U+00A5&gt;75 billion annually.2
History
The concept of tissue-pack marketing was first developed in Japan. Its origins date back to the late 1960s, when Hiroshi Mori, the founder of a paper-goods manufacturer in K&lt;U+014D&gt;chi Prefecture called Meisei Industrial Co., was looking for ways to expand demand for paper products. At the time, the most common marketing freebie in Japan was boxes of matches. These were often given away at banks and then used by women in the kitchen.
Mori figured tissues would have even wider appeal than the matches, and as a result he developed the machinery to fold and package tissues into easy-to-carry, pocket-size packs. The new product was marketed only as a form of advertising and wasn't sold to consumers. Even today, pocket tissues barely exist as a retail category in Japan because they have such a presence on the streets and people have come to expect them for free.
Benefits

A variety of advertising tissue packages.

Where the more traditional fliers are often discarded without being read or simply not accepted by the consumer, the same is not true of advertising tissue-packs. The most important reason for this is because the tissues add functionality to the advertisement. This is functionality has several important benefits:
Gets the ad into consumers' hands
In a recent Internet survey of over 100,000 Japanese consumers conducted by Marsh Research, 76% said they accept free tissues.3 This is a much higher rate than either fliers or leaflets.
Gets consumers to read/look at the ad after they have accepted it
In the same study referenced above, of those that accepted the tissue-pack, slightly more than half of the participants said they either &quot;definitely look&quot; or &quot;at least glance at&quot; the advertisement.4 One possible reason for this increased statistic when compared to fliers is that consumers were hoping to find coupons or special offers packaged inside with the tissues. Another reason relies on the Japanese sense of obligation for having received a gift. This obligation would make it seem rude to accept the free gift (the tissue-pack) and not repay them by simply glancing at the advertisement.
Helps consumers to retain the ad and its message
The advertisement on the package is more likely to be retained by the consumer because they are being consistently exposed to it (This is assuming that the consumer is using the tissues in the package over a prolonged period of time until they are completely used up).
Global Influence
Japan is still very obviously the main market for tissue-pack advertising, but the practice has begun to spread overseas. A subsidiary of the Japanese trading company Itochu International, Adpackusa.com, introduced tissue-pack marketing in New York in 2005 and now offers it throughout the United States.5
See Also

Guerrilla Marketing

References

External links

AdPackUSA.com

Category:Advertising Category:Communications in Japan Category:Japanese culture



http://search.japantimes.co.jp/cgi-bin/ek20070821wh.html↩






