
Mindwipe is a fictional character in the Transformers: Generation 1 toy line and fictional series by Hasbro.
Transformers: Generation 1

Mindwipe is a Decepticon Headmaster who transforms into a bat.
Mindwipe's tech spec describes him as a mystic who spends more time trying to contact the electromagnetic essences of long-dead Decepticons than talking to live ones. His electromagnetic probings sometimes intercept television broadcasts from Earth.
Mindwipe is binary-bonded to Vorath, Nebulon's former Science Minister, who was expelled because of illegal experiments.
In the Japanese fiction, Vorath is a small, completely mechanical Decepticon from the planet Master, who transforms into the head of the larger robot. The larger Wipe body he controls is a non-living machine. The Headmaster component is named Vorath on the Japanese box, but he is only referred to as Wipe in the Japanese animated series.
Marvel Comics
Note: U.K.-only stories are in italics.
Mindwipe originally appeared in the four issue The Transformers: Headmasters comic, where he was binary bonded to his Headmaster partner Vorath.
Issue #248 of the Marvel U.K. Transformers comic featured a story called &quot;Fallen Star&quot;, where Starscream began to doubt himself, despite being of the most powerful Transformers. Soundwave, Mindwipe and Weirdwolf feared Starscream would attack, but Starscream thought they were laughing at him behind his back. Leaving Starscream came across the Autobots Chainclaw, Cloudburst and Getaway, who were assigned by Optimus Prime to spy on him. Starscream soundly defeated all three Autobots and regained his self confidence.
He last appeared in the U.S. Generation 1 series in issue #75, &quot;On the Edge of Extinction&quot;.
Mindwipe made an appearance in the Decepticon forces under the command of Megatron in issue #7 of the Marvel Generation 2 comic series, in a story called &quot;New Dawn&quot;. Megatron lead his Decepticons against Jhiaxus's second generation Cybertronians near the moon of Tykos. The Decepticons were defeated and Megatron left injured, presumed dead, but swearing revenge. 1
Animated series
Mindwipe only appeared in the U.S. Transformers TV series in the 3-part episode &quot;The Rebirth&quot;.
In the Japanese Headmasters animated series Mindwipe was one of the featured Decepticon Headmasters through the series. He last appeared in episode 35, &quot;The Final Showdown on Earth Part 2&quot;.
Manga
The Mindwipe appeared among the Decepticon forces in Masterforce manga #6, &quot;The Battle Begins! Earth: The United Universe Federation!&quot; 2
Dreamwave Productions
 Mindwipe was one of the members of the Chaos Trinity in the second War Within series. In this series he turns into a Cybertronian jet and isn't a Headmaster yet.
When Megatron and Autobot leader Optimus Prime disappeared in an accident with a Space Bridge, the Autobot and Decepticon forces splintered into smaller factions. Bludgeon became leader of the Chaos Trinity, which was comprised of himself, Bugly and Mindwipe. The Chaos Trinity was devoted to expanding its members' knowledge of the mystic arts. The Chaos Trinity acted as master manipulators, tricking others into doing their work for them. For instance, when Shockwave's faction developed Trypticon, the Chaos Trinity tipped off the Autobots under Prowl where it was being tested. The Chaos Trinity came into the service of the Fallen, an ancient Transformer who betrayed Primus and was now an agent of Unicron. The Fallen promised to expand their mystic powers in return for their loyalty, after threatening to kill them if they didn't join him. Attacking a meeting between Jetfire and Shockwave, hypnotising the former and incapacitating the latter, they were then beaten by Grimlock, who had come because he believed that Jetfire was betraying them. However, this was all part of a bigger set-up by the Fallen, who easily defeated the Dinobot leader. Then battling the Protectobots and kidnapping Hot Spot, the Trinity took him to the Fallen for an arcane ritual. However, they were attacked by Shockwave's Decepticons. Shockwave personally gunned down Mindwipe, with Bugly falling to a combined barrage. Bludgeon fled, but was blasted by a teleporting Skywarp '''
Toys

Generation 1 Mindwipe with Vorath (1987)



A new mold. Mindwipe came with Vorath and a gun accessory. 3


{{-}}
Transformers: Revenge of the Fallen

Toys

Revenge of the Fallen Voyager Class Mindwipe (not released yet)

References

Category:Decepticons Category:Fictional bats Category:Headmasters



http://www.seibertron.com/comics/view.php?comic_id=113↩
http://www.tfarchive.com/comics/japanese/manga.php#masterforce↩
http://www.cobraislandtoys.com/tf/1987/mindwipe.html↩


