

Jefferson Wood is a professional and award winning illustrator and graphic designer.
Personal life
Jefferson Wood is married and has three children. Wood lives in the Boise, Idaho area.
Education
Wood attended Centennial High School (Boise, Idaho).1 Wood studied at the Savannah College of Art and Design where he received a B.A. in 1995. He was the first in the world to graduate with a degree in Sequential art. Wood studied under comic book illustrator Bo Hampton (who himself was a student under Will Eisner and Al Williamson).
Career
Wood's illustration style is somewhat unusual which sets him apart from other poster designers. It is kind of a mix of old and new. He has done work for Icon Productions2 and among others, Bravo Entertaiment (now defunct) and the Tate Entertainment Group. Since 2000, Wood runs his own company, Concert Poster Graphics in Boise, Idaho.
Awards and accolades
1st place in the first ever Pollstar Concert Industry Consortium (CIC) poster contest (in 2004) with his poster for Tom Petty and the Heartbreakers.3 That same poster was ranked #18 best rock poster of all time by Billboard Magazine.4
His poster for The B-52s was ranked #1 in the Pollstar CIC poster competition in 2009.5
Today
Wood is currently the graphic designer for several large concert promoters, and freelances for many others. He handles all tour artwork for the Jeff Dunham and Carlos Mencia tours, as well as other acts, including Gabriel Iglesias.
Work
Image:JW-zztopposter.jpg|

ZZ Top

Image:JW-2004-tompettyposter.jpg|

Tom Petty and
the heartbreakers

Image:JW-2009-b52poster.jpg|

B52's

Image:JW-2009-toddrundgrenposter.jpg|

Todd Rundgren

References

External links

Jefferson Wood's website
Jefferson Wood on the Behance website
Jefferson Wood on the Creative Hotlist website
Jefferson Wood on the Fine Art America website

Categories

Category: 1973 births Category:Living people Category:American artists Category:American graphic designers Category:Poster artists Category:Album-cover and concert-poster artists Category:American illustrators



Alumni Class Website↩
Icon entertainment website↩
Pollstar CIC Archive on internet↩
The list of Top 25 Rock Posters by Billboard Magazine↩
Pollstar CIC 2009 Website↩


