The Google Book Search Settlement Agreement is an agreement between the Authors Guild, the Association of American Publishers and Google in settlement of Authors Guild et al. v. Google, a class action lawsuit alleging Copyright infringement. In October 2008, Google agreed to pay $125 million dollars to settle the lawsuit.1 The settlement agreement also included licensing provisions, allowing Google to sell personal and institutional subscriptions its database of books. In November 2009, the parties amended the settlement agreement2 after the Department of Justice filed a brief suggesting that the initial agreement may violate US anti-trust laws.
The amended settlement agreement has yet to be approved. The court held a Fairness Hearing on February 18, 2010, but supervising judge Denny Chin has not yet issued a ruling.3
Lawsuit history
Background

In 2002, Google began digitizing books in libraries.4 In 2004, Google launched Book Search, allowing users to search its database of books. Users could view snippets of copyrighted books, and download and view full copies of public domain books.
Lawsuit
On September 20, 2005, the Authors Guild filed a class action lawsuit in the Southern District of New York against Google. The Authors Guild argued that Google's Library Project involved &quot;massive copyright infringement&quot; because it created digital copies of copyrighted works.56 In response, Google temporarily suspended scanning copyrighted works to allow for changes to its Print Publisher Program and allow copyright owners to submit lists of books they wish to be excluded.7
On October 19, 2005, the Association of American Publishers filed another lawsuit against Google for copyright infringement, seeking injunctive relief.8 Google responded that its use was a fair use because they were only showing &quot;snippets&quot; for books where they did not have permission from a rightsholder. 9.
In the Spring of 2006 the parties began negotiations to settle the lawsuit.
Settlement
Initial settlement agreement
In October 2008, the parties to the lawsuit proposed a Settlement Agreement, which called for Google to pay out $125 million: $45 million would go to pay rightsholders whose copyrights had allegedly been infringed; $15.5 million to the publishers' legal fees; $30 million to the authors' lawyers; and $34.5 million to create a Book Rights Registry, a form of copyright collective to collect revenues from Google and dispense them to the rightsholders. In exchange, the agreement released Google and its library partners from liability for its book digitization. The agreement is built upon an intricate joint venture arrangement for the management of Google's book project, including a variety of revenue models. Google will generate revenue through an institutional subscription for libraries and a consumer subscription for perpetual access to individual books, referral links to retail booksellers, and advertising on book pages.
Amended settlement agreement
In November 2009, the parties amended the settlement agreement.10 The amended agreement includes the following significant changes:

Foreign Works
The amended agreement limited the scope to foreign books that are registered with the U.S. Copyright Office or published in the U.K., Canada, or Australia.11 Additionally, the amended agreement added board memebers to the Books Rights Registry from the U.K., Canada, and Australia.

Revenue Model
The rightsholder has the ability to renegotiate the revenue share, and Google has added flexibility in discounting.

Unclaimed works
The amended agreement created a fiduciary to hold payments due to orphan works.12 If the rightsholder is never ascertained, the funds are distributed cy-pr&lt;U+00E8&gt;s instead of redistributed among rightsholders.

Public Access License
The amended agreement expanded the number of public licenses allowed for a library.


In February 2009, a Google Book Search Settlement web site was created where rightsholders could claim their books for the purposes of the settlement.13 Rightsholders whose books have been digitized by Google and who have claimed their books will receive a one-time payment of $60 per book, or $5 to $15 for partial works (called &quot;inserts&quot;),14 plus 63 percent of all revenues associated with their works, including subscription, referrals, and advertisements.15 After claiming a book, a rightsholder will also have the ability to alter the default display settings.
Criticisms
Copyright
Harvard University Library, which had been one of the original partners to Google's Library Project, has threatened to end its partnership with Google should the company continue its policy of scanning books that are still under copyright.16
Siva Vaidhyanathan, associate professor of Media Studies and Law at the University of Virginia, has argued that the project poses a danger for the doctrine of fair use, because the fair use claims are arguably so excessive that it may cause judicial limitation of that right.1718 Because of the settlement, Author's Guild et al. v. Google leaves the fair use dispute unresolved.
In December 2009, science fiction and fantasy author Ursula K. LeGuin announced on her website her resignation from the Authors' Guild over the settlement, claiming the leadership of the Guild had &quot;sold us [its members] down the river&quot; and that the settlement threatened &quot;the whole concept of copyright.&quot;19
Anti-trust
Since the settlement agreement covers the previously digitized books and provides an revenue model for future digitization, it &quot;give Google control over the digitizing of virtually all books covered by copyright in the United States.&quot;20 Since the license agreement is non-exclusive, it does not necessarily tie publishes to Google's service. In a journal article, MIT Professor Jerry A. Hausman and Criterion Economics Chairman J. Gregory Sidak conclude that the service will be unable to exercise market power. Hausman and Sidak believe that Google Book Search should, on net, yield a significant gain in consumer surplus.21
Prominent technology, publishing, library and author groups have formed the Open Book Alliance22 works to counter the &quot;scheme to monopolize the access, distribution and pricing of the largest digital database of books in the world.&quot;23
Censorship
Google will be able to create a &quot;content management system&quot; with their scans as a result of the settlement24 and will have the power to remove inappropriate books the same way that it is able to remove inappropriate movies from YouTube. Some fear that this could lead to censorship and that there is public interest in protecting the scans from being buried behind Google's ranking system.
Privacy
At the Final Fairness Hearing, privacy advocates such as the EFF and ACLU voiced concerns that Google would keep a record of books accessed through Book Search.25 Privacy advocates want Google to provide privacy assurances comparable to those enjoyed by visitors to traditional libraries.2627.
Orphan works
Brewster Kahle, the co-founder of the Internet Archive and Open Content Alliance has been critical of the proposed settlement, saying &quot;Let's free the orphans, not have them pass from their legal limbo into a life controlled by Google&quot;28
Response to the amended settlement
Before the amended settlement, the Open Book Alliance released a framework for &quot;Settlement 2.0&quot;:29

The settlement must not grant Google an exclusive set of rights (de facto or otherwise) or result in any one entity gaining control over access to and distribution of the world&lt;U+2019&gt;s largest digital database of books.
Authors and other rights holders must retain meaningful rights and the ability to determine the use of their works that have been scanned by Google.
The settlement must result in the creation of a true digital library that grants all researchers and users, commercial and non-commercial, full access that guarantees the ability to innovate on the knowledge it contains.
All class members must be treated equitably.
The settlement cannot provide for competition by making others engage in future litigation.
Congress must retain the exclusive authority granted by the U.S. Constitution to set copyright policy.
All rights holders impacted by the settlement must have a meaningful ability to receive notice, understand its terms and opt-out.
The parties that negotiated the settlement must live under the terms to which they seek to bind others, rather than their own separately negotiated arrangements.

After the amended settlement, the Open Book Alliance said, &quot;Fundamentally, this settlement remains a set-piece designed to serve the private commercial interests of Google and its partners...by performing surgical nip and tuck...[they] are attempting to distract people from their continued efforts to establish a monopoly over digital-content access and distribution.&quot;
The Open Book Alliance outlined its major concerns:30

The settlement still allows Google to purchase a monopoly on digital books.
Authors must still opt-out of the agreement even if they have not given their consent to be included in the deal.
Google&lt;U+2019&gt;s claims regarding the Unclaimed Works Fiduciary are misleading and simply false.
Consumer privacy has NOT been protected or improved.
Academic libraries and independent researchers are still at the mercy of pricing from Google&lt;U+2019&gt;s one stop book shop.
Instead of negotiating with stakeholders, Google cuts them out.

References

Bibliography

(CC-BY)
Jerry A. Hausman and J. Gregory Sidak, Google and the Proper Antitrust Scrutiny of Orphan Books, 5 Journal of Competition Law &amp; Economics 3 (2009)


External links

C-SPAN Booktv: A Tale of the Google Book Settlement and the Public Interest: Conclusions on the Competitive Elements
American Society of Journalists and Authors - statement
Authors Guild v. Google - Settlement Resources Page
Google Book Search Settlement administrative site
Google Book Settlement
National Writers Union Book Division
The Public Index, a site to study and discuss the proposed Google Book Search settlement.
Google Book Settlement (Pro and Con)
Open Content Alliance
Open Book Alliance
Federal District Court Filings (Author's Guild vs. Google, 2005-2009)

Category:Google Category:United States copyright case law Category:Mass digitization



↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩
↩

↩
↩
↩


↩
↩
↩
Open letter of resignation from the Authors' Guild by Ursula K. LeGuin↩
↩
↩
Open Book Alliance Members↩
Open Book Alliance Mission↩
↩
↩
Google Book Search Settlement and Reader Privacy↩
Privacy Missing From Google Books Settlement, PW World, August 28, 2009↩
Google Claims to be the Lone Defender of Orphans: Not lone, not defender↩
Open Book Alliance Releases Baseline Requirements for Revised Google Book Settlement Proposal↩
Parties Submit New Proposal to Settle Google Book Search Litigation↩


