
500 East1 is a streetcar stop in South Salt Lake, Utah, in the United States, served by Utah Transit Authority's (UTA) S Line (previously known as the Sugar House Streetcar). The S Line provides service from the Sugar House neighborhood of Salt Lake City to the city of South Salt Lake (where it connects with UTA's TRAX light rail system).
Description
The 500 East stop is located at 2234 South 500 East, just west of South 500 East. The single set of tracks diverges to form a passing track at this stop, thus permitting (as planned in its schedule2) two cars to stop at the stop at the same time. (The two tracks continue east across 500 East before merging back to a single set.) The two side platforms are located on the far north and south sides of the tracks. There is very limited street-side parking possible nearby. The stop began service on 8 December 2013 and is operated by Utah Transit Authority.
All of UTA's TRAX and FrontRunner trains and stations, streetcars and streetcar stops, and all fixed route buses are compliant with Americans with Disabilities Act and are therefore accessible to those with disabilities.3 Signage at the stations, on the passenger platforms, and on the trains clearly indicate accessibility options. In accordance with the Utah Clean Air Act and UTA ordinance, &quot;smoking is prohibited on UTA vehicles as well as UTA bus stops, TRAX stations, and FrontRunner stations&quot;.4
Streetcar schedule
On weekdays and Saturdays the first eastbound S Line streetcar (to the Fairmont stop) leaves the 500 East stop at 6:06 am and the first westbound streetcar (to the Central Pointe Station) leaves at 6:26 am. The last eastbound streetcar leaves at 9:06 pm and the last westbound streetcar leaves at 9:26 pm.
On Sundays the first eastbound streetcar leaves at 9:06 am and the first westbound streetcar leaves stop at 9:26 am. The last eastbound streetcar leaves at 7:06 pm and the last westbound streetcar leaves at 7:26 pm.
S Line streetcars run every twenty minutes every day (except holidays when there is no service) and take about twelve minutes to run the length of the route (of Phase 1).5
Bus connections
Note: While no buses connect directly with any S Line stops, the following bus routes stop in close proximity to the station (on South 500 East).

UTA Route 205 - 500 East (Downtown Salt Lake City, including Salt Lake Central, Old GreekTown stations, Salt Palace, and Liberty Park - South Salt Lake - Murray, including Murray North Station [via 500 East])

Notes

References

External links

Official UTA website
Official UTA S Line website
Official S Line website



Category:UTA streetcar stops Category:Railway stations opened in 2013 Category:Railway stations in Salt Lake County, Utah Category:2013 establishments in Utah



↩

↩
↩
↩


