
The Eklutna Dam, also referred to as the New Eklutna Dam or Upper Eklutna Dam, is an embankment dam on the Eklutna River about  northeast of Anchorage in Alaska, United States. The primary purpose of the dam is hydroelectric power generation and it supports a 47 MW power plant. It was completed in 1929 but underwent several repairs over the years which concluded with a final raising in 1955. Ownership of the dam and power plant is shared by Anchorage Municipal Light &amp; Power, Chugach Electric and Matanuska Electric.
Background
The original dam was constructed by the Anchorage Light and Power Company between 1927 and 1929 atop a natural landslide dam in the Eklutna Valley.1 It regulated the river to the Lower Eklutna Dam which diverted water into the Old Eklutna Power Plant. The dam was rebuilt and improved in 1941 after the previous structure failed. During this same year, the population in Anchorage increased greatly with the onset of World War II. To cope with increasing power demand, the United States Bureau of Reclamation proposed the Eklutna Project. It included raising the dam and installing a new power plant opposite Goat Mountain to the north, along the Knik River. The United States Congress authorized the project on 31 July 1950. Construction began in 1951 and raising the dam commenced the following year. The first generator was commissioned on 8 January 1955, the second and last on 1 April 1955. On 1 July 1955 the entire project was complete.2
Design
 The dam is  tall and  long. It is filled with  sand, gravel and earth and its crest is  above sea level. The reservoir created by the dam, Eklutna Lake, covers  and is  long. At an elevation of , the reservoir holds  of water. To connect the reservoir and power plant, there is a  diameter,  long penstock which starts at the intake, located on the northwest corner of the lake.3 From the intake, water rushes down the penstock where it reaches two 23.5 MW Francis turbine-generators. Water used by the power plant is then discharged into the Knik River.4
References



Category:Dams in Alaska Category:Embankment dams Category:Dams completed in 1955 Category:1955 establishments in Alaska Category:Energy infrastructure completed in 1955 Category:Hydroelectric power plants in Alaska Category:Buildings and structures in Anchorage, Alaska



↩
↩




