
The Suffolk County Sheriff's Office is the oldest law enforcement agency in Suffolk County, New York. The sheriff's office currently employs approximately 1200 people, including 841 correction officers, 247 deputy sheriffs, and 130 civilian personnel.1 Its Office and Business Operations are located at the Riverhead Correctional Facility, 100 Center Drive South in Riverhead (although it bears the Riverhead name, it is actually south of the Peconic River in Riverside in the Town of Southampton).
The sheriff of Suffolk County is elected to the term of four years.2
History
On Long Island, from 1664 to 1683 ridings were used to establish boundaries within the shire. The East riding comprised the territory now occupied by Suffolk County. The West riding consisted of Kings County and Newtown (Queens County). The remainder of Long Island belonged to the North riding. Collectively, the three ridings were called Yorkshire.
The colonial governor of New York appointed a &quot;High Sheriff&quot; for Yorkshire with a Deputy from each riding. In 1683, the ridings were abolished and the East riding became Suffolk County. The High Sheriff was no longer necessary being that each County would now have its own Sheriff. Suffolk County&lt;U+2019&gt;s first Sheriff was Josiah Hobart in 1683.
After the American Revolution, the practice of the Governor appointing a sheriff continued and was incorporated into the first New York Constitution, adopted in 1777. At the 1821 constitutional convention, the office of sheriff became an elective office. That year, Abraham Gardiner became Suffolk County's first elected sheriff.
Duties
The Sheriff's Office:

Operates the two Suffolk County correctional facilities (in Yaphank and Riverhead), provides county courthouse security and detention.
Provides service and enforcement of civil papers, evictions and warrants.
Are responsible for patrolling and investigating all crimes committed on county-owned property such as county government office buildings and the campuses of the Suffolk County Community College, as well as providing assistance to the Suffolk County Park Police.
Has several specialized units, including K-9 Units, Marine Units, a Dive Team, a Mountain Bike Unit, an ATV Unit, the Sheriff's Emergency Response Team (SERT), a tactical weapons team and a sniper section, and a Highway Patrol Division (including a Motorcycle Section), which covers all roadways in Suffolk County, answering all 911 calls for service on State Route 27 (Sunrise Hwy) from exit 37 to the Southampton Town line and Interstate Route 495 (The Long Island Expressway) from the Nassau County border to the Riverhead Town line.

Celebrating its 327th year of service to Suffolk County.
The Sheriff's Office participates in various task forces, such as the East End Drug Task Force, and the specially created joint task force with the U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement to investigate and arrest illegal immigrant gang members, the Drug Enforcement Administration, High Intensity Drug Trafficking Area, and the United States Marshals Service, undercover assignments, and also conduct criminal investigations.
Rank structure
The SCSO formerly had an Undersheriff for Corrections and an Undersheriff for Law Enforcement. Sheriff DeMarco changed that practice by appointing an undersheriff as his number two man in the department and a second undersheriff subordinate to the first. There are also two wardens; a one star Warden and two star Warden. The one star Warden subordinate to the other.



Title
Insignia




Sheriff Vincent F. DeMarco

5_Gold_Stars.svg



Undersheriff John P. Meyerricks

4_Gold_Stars.svg



Undersheriff Joseph T. Caracappa

3_Gold_Stars.svg



Chief Deputy Sheriff/Chief of Staff/Warden

2_Gold_Stars.svg



Warden

1_Gold_Star.svg



Deputy Warden

Colonel_Gold.png



Captain/Investigator Captain

SCSO_Captain_Insignia.png



Lieutenant/Investigator Lieutenant

SCSO_Lieutenant_Insignia.png



Sergeant/Investigator Sergeant
Deputy  Corrections 


Deputy Sheriff/Correction Officer Deputy Sheriff Investigator/Correction Officer Investigator




List of sheriffs
There have been many sheriffs through 325 years of service.3



Sheriff
Start of term
Sheriff
Start of term
Sheriff
Start of term




Josiah Hobart
1683
Abraham Gardiner
1821
Henry Preston
1903


John Mulford
1701
Samuel Smith
1826
John Wells
1906


Hugh Gray
1702
Abraham Gardiner
1829
Charles Platt
1909


John Brush
1710
Richard Smith
1832
Melville Brush
1912


Daniel Youngs
1718
Silas Horton
1835
D. Henry Brown
1913


Samuel Dayton
1723
Samuel Miller
1838
Charles O'Dell
1914


William Sell
1728
David Brush
1841
Amza Biggs
1917


Joseph Smith
1730
Henry Penny
1844
John Kelly
1920


David Corrie
1731
David Rose
1847
Amza Biggs
1923


Jacob Conklin
1734
John Clark
1850
Burton Howe
1926


Thomas Higbe
1740
Samuel Phillips
1855
Ellis Taylor
1929


James Muirson
1774
George Carman
1856
Joseph Warta
1932


Thomas Wickes
1785
Stephen Wilson
1859
William McCollom
1935


Silas Halsey
1787
Daniel Osborn
1862
Jacob Dreyer
1938


Thomas Wickes
1791
George Smith
1868
John Levy
1941


Phinaes Carll
1799
J. Henry Perkins
1871
William McCollom
1942


Josiah Reeve
1803
Egbert Lewis
1874
Charles Dominy
1957


Phinaes Smith
1807
George Cooper
1877
Frank Gross
1962


Josiah Reeve
1808
Robert Petty
1888
Philip Corso
1970


Benjamin Brewster
1810
Selah Brewster
1883
Donald Dilworth
1976


Josiah Reeve
1811
Henry Halsey
1886
John Finnerty
1977


Benjamin Brewster
1812
Robert Petty
1888
Eugene Dooley
1986


Josiah Reeve
1813
A. M. Darling
1891
Patrick Mahoney
1990


Nathaniel Conklin
1814
Benjamin Wood
1897
Alfred C. Tisch
2002


Josiah Reeve
1815
J. Sheridan Wells
1900
Vincent F. DeMarco
2006


Samuel Carll
1819















Line of duty deaths
Since the establishment of the Suffolk County Sheriff's Office, four officers have died in the line of duty.4



Officer
Date of Death
Details




Deputy Sheriff William Henry Rafford

Wednesday, December 16, 1903
Gunfire


Deputy Sheriff George A. Stillwell

Friday, August 10, 1906
Gunfire


[http://www.odmp.org/officer/13591-deputy-sheriff-harold-e.-vanderoef-jr. Deputy Sheriff Harold E. Vanderoef Jr.]

Thursday, June 4, 1987
Struck by vehicle


Correction Officer Andrew Paul Reister

Saturday, August 9, 2008
Assault








SCSO awards, commendations, citations and medals
The Sheriff's Office presents a number of medals to its members for meritorious service.

Medal of Honor:

 A gold medal and a blue and gold bar (inscription &quot;HONOR&quot;). The Sheriff&lt;U+2019&gt;s Office Medal of Honor may be awarded to any Sworn Officer of the Sheriff&lt;U+2019&gt;s Office who, while being fully aware of an imminent risk of life, intelligently distinguishes himself/herself in an act of gallantry above and beyond the call of duty.

Combat Gold Medal:

 A gold medal and a blue-red-blue bar (inscription &quot;COMBAT&quot;). The Combat Gold Medal may be awarded for the successful performance of an act of extraordinary heroism while engaged in personal combat with an armed adversry, at imminent personal hazard of live, in the intelligent performance of duty.

Bravery Gold Medal:

 A gold medal and a red-blue-red bar (inscription &quot;BRAVERY&quot;). The Bravery Gold Medal may be awarded for an act of outstanding personal bravery intlligently performed, involving personal risk of life, or involvining grave personal danger.

Combat Silver Medal

 A silver medal and a blue-white-blue bar (inscription &quot;COMBAT&quot;). The Combat Silver Medal may be awarded for the successful performance of an act of heroism while engaged in personal combat with an armed adversry, at imminent personal hazard of live, in the intelligent performance of duty.

Bravery Silver Medal

 A silver medal and a white-blue-white bar (inscription &quot;BRAVERY&quot;). The Bravery Silver Medal may be awarded for an act of personal bravery intlligently performed, involving personal risk of life, or involvining grave personal danger.

Purple Heart:

 A solid purple bar. The Purple Heart may be awarded to any Sworn Officer of the Sheriff&lt;U+2019&gt;s Office who is seriously wounded as a result of the hostile actions of another occurring under honorable conditions, or posthumously, to a Sworn Member of the Sheriff's Office who is killed in the performance of duty under honorable conditions as the result of the hostile actions of another.

Exceptional Meritorious Award:

 A white-blue-white-red-white-blue-white breast bar. May be awarded for an act of personal bravery, intelligently performed, involving grave personal danger.

Meritorious Service Award:

 A bronze plaque with a blue-white-blue bar. The Meritorious Service Award may be awarded to any Sworn Officer of the Sheriff&lt;U+2019&gt;s Office who, while in the line of duty and exhibiting professionalism to the highest degree, distinguishes himself/herself in overcoming a seemingly insurmountable task, problem, situation or period of time through the use of constant faithfulness, perseverance and an overall dedication to duty.

Exceptional Service Award:

 A red-white-red bar. The Exceptional Service Award may be awarded to any member of the Sheriff&lt;U+2019&gt;s Office who, while in the line of duty and exhibiting professionalism to the highest degree, distinguishes himself/herself to such an extent that this action goes beyond those which are normally expected of a Sheriff&lt;U+2019&gt;s Office member.

Special Service Award:

 A white-blue-white-blue-white breast bar. Awarded to a Sworn Officer who submits a device or method adopted by the Office, which significantly increases efficiency in administrative or tactical procedures.

DWI Award:

 A blue and gray breast bar (inscription &quot;5&quot;, &quot;10&quot;, &quot;20&quot;, or &quot;50&quot; in silver within the blue and &quot;STOP D.W.I.&quot; in blue within the gray). Awarded to a Deputy Sheriff who has affected five or more, as indicated by the numeral, arrests for DWI.

Letter of Commendation:

A Letter of Commendation may be awarded to members of the Sheriff&lt;U+2019&gt;s Office who conduct themselves in a professional manner while performing their duties and by their deeds give other members an ideal or example to follow. In addition, the member's conduct went beyond the set standard and demonstrated a truly special strength or action evidencing courage, resourcefulness and/or a particular dedication to duty.

Letter of Recognition:

A Letter of Recognition may be awarded to members of the Sheriff&lt;U+2019&gt;s Office who conduct themselves in a professional manner while performing their duties and by their deeds give other members an ideal or example to follow.

Civilian Commendation:

A laminated letter plaque. The Civilian Commendation may be awarded to a civilian who has rendered assistance to a member of the Sheriff&lt;U+2019&gt;s Office during an emergency or who has rendered outstanding assistance to the Sheriff&lt;U+2019&gt;s Office as a whole.

Civilian Award:

A Certificate of Appreciation. The Civilian Award may be awarded to any individual or organization who, by act or deed, has contributed to a better Sheriff&lt;U+2019&gt;s Office-community relationship.

Unit Award:

A gold plaque. The Unit Award may be awarded to any unit, section, bureau or command in the Sheriff&lt;U+2019&gt;s Office which demonstrates unit integrity and outstanding performance over a period of time or for a specific assignment, and while in the performance of its duties, went beyond the set standard and demonstrated a truly special strength or action evidencing courage, resourcefulness and/or a particular dedication to duty.

9-11 World Trade Center Award:

 A red, white, blue and gold (American Flag) breast bar (inscription &quot;09-11-01&quot; in gold). Awarded to each Sworn Officer of the Sheriff's Office who was assigned to the World Trade Center &quot;Ground Zero&quot;site in New York City.

T.W.A. Flight 800 Crash Site Award:

 A blue breast bar (inscription &quot;TWA 800&quot;). Awarded to each Sworn Officer of the Sheriff's Officer who was assigned to the TWA crash site in July 1996.

Professionalization Award:

 A white over blue breast bar. Awarded to a Sworn Officer who has received a baccalaureate degree from an accredited university or college, or a Sworn Officer who has been awarded an associate degree from an accredited university or college.

Emergency Medical Technician Award:

 A green breast bar with a gold medical insignia. Awarded to a Sworn Officer who has been ceritified as an Emergency Medical Technician or as a Paramedic by the New York State Department of Health.

Firearms Instructor Award:

 A black breast bar with &quot;Firearms Instructor&quot; in gold. Awarded to a Sworn Officer who has been certified as an Firearms Instructor by the Office of Public Safety of the State of New York.

Instructor Award:

 A white-red-white-red-white breast bar. Awarded to a Sworn Officer who has been certified as an Instructor by the Office of Public Safety of the State of New York.

Field Training Officer Award:

 A blue-yellow-blue-yellow-blue-yellow-blue breast bar. Awarded to a Sworn Officer who is an active certified participant in the Field Training Officer Program.

Tactical Unit Award:

 A black breast bar with &quot;Tactical Unit&quot; in gold. Awarded to a Sworn Officer who has been certified as a Tactical Rifle and Concealment Sniper by the Federal Bureau of Investigation and is an active member of the T.R.A.C. Unit.

S.E.R.T. Unit Award:

 A black breast bar with &quot;S.E.R.T.&quot; in gold. Awarded to a Correction Officer who has successfully completed the course of instruction approved by the Sheriff's Office and is an active Sworn Officer of the Sheriff's Office S.E.R.T. Unit.

Longevity Award:

 A gold-red-gold breast bar (inscription &quot;5&quot;, &quot;10&quot;, &quot;15&quot;, '20&quot;, &quot;25&quot;, &quot;30&quot;, or &quot;35&quot; in gold). Awarded to a Sworn Officer who has completed the appropriate number of years of service.

Military Veteran Award:

 A blue breast bar with 12 gold stars. Awarded to a Sworn Officer who is a military veteran.

Military Branch of Service Award:

 Air Force - A light blue breast bar (United States Air Force insignia in silver). Awarded to a Sworn Officer who is a veteran of the United States Air Force.  Army - A black breast bar (United States Army insignia in gold). Awarded to a Sworn Officer who is a veteran of the United States Army.  Coast Guard - A blue breast bar (United States Coast Guard insignia in gold). Awarded to a Sworn Officer who is a veteran of the United States Coast Guard.  Marine Corps - A red breast bar (United States Marine Corp insignia in gold). Awarded to a Sworn Officer who is a veteran of the United States Marine Corps.  Navy - A blue breast bar (United States Navy insignia in gold). Awarded to a Sworn Officer who is a veteran of the United States Navy.

Firearms Proficiency Award:

  A gold breast bar (inscription &quot;PISTOL SHARPSHOOTER&quot;, &quot;PISTOL EXPERT&quot; OR &quot;DISTINGUISHED PISTOL EXPERT&quot;). Awarded to a Sworn Officer for attaining a level of proficiency with the service firearm. {{-}}
See also


List of law enforcement agencies in New York
List of Long Island law enforcement agencies
Suffolk County Police Department

{{-}}

References

External links

Suffolk County Sheriff's Office page

Category:Suffolk County, New York Category:Law enforcement agencies of New York Category:Sheriffs' departments of New York



Suffolk County Sheriff's Office page↩
Suffolk County Sheriff's Office History page↩
Suffolk County Sheriff's Office History page↩
The Officer Down Memorial Page↩


